Study ID: Yildiz 2002_2002
Outcome: 28-day all-cause mortality
Data Type: binary

===ABSTRACT===
Abstract
Introduction The aim of the study was to assess the prognostic importance of basal cortisol
concentrations and cortisol response to corticotropin, and to determine the effects of physiological
dose steroid therapy on mortality in patients with sepsis.
Methods Basal cortisol level and corticotropin stimulation test were performed within 24 hours in all
patients. One group (20 patients) received standard therapy for sepsis and physiological-dose steroid
therapy for 10 days; the other group (20 patients) received only standard therapy for sepsis. Basal cortisol
level was measured on the 14th day in patients who recovered. The outcome of sepsis was compared.
Results Only Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score was found related to mortality,
independent from other factors in multivariate analysis. No significant difference was found between
the changes in the percentage of SOFA scores of the steroid therapy group and the standard therapy
group in survivors, nor between the groups in basal and peak cortisol levels, cortisol response to
corticotropin test and mortality. The mortality rates among patients with occult adrenal insufficiencies
were 40% in the steroid therapy group and 55.6% in the standard therapy group.
Discussion There was a trend towards a decrease in the mortality rates of the patients with sepsis
who received physiological-dose steroid therapy. In the advancing process from sepsis to septic
shock, adrenal insufficiency was not frequent as suppose

===RESULTS===
Results Only Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score was found related to mortality,
independent from other factors in multivariate analysis. No significant difference was found between
the changes in the percentage of SOFA scores of the steroid therapy group and the standard therapy
group in survivors, nor between the groups in basal and peak cortisol levels, cortisol response to
corticotropin test and mortality. The mortality rates among patients with occult adrenal insufficiencies
were 40% in the steroid therapy group and 55.6% in the standard therapy group.
Discussion There was a trend towards a decrease in the mortality rates of the patients with sepsis
who received physiological-dose steroid therapy. In the advancing process from sepsis to septic
shock, adrenal insufficiency was not frequent as supposed. There was a trend (that did not reach
significance) towards a decrease in the mortality rates of the patients with sepsis who received
physiological-dose steroid therapy.
Keywords adrenal insufficiencies, cortisol, occult adrenal insufficiencies, physiological-dose steroid therapy, sepsis
Received: 5 October 2001
Revisions requested: 5 December 2001
Revisions received: 27 January 2002
Accepted: 2 April 2002
Published: 19 April 2002
Critical Care 2002, 6:251-258
This article is online at http://ccforum.com/content/6/3/251
© 2002 Yildiz et al., licensee BioMed Central Ltd
(Print ISSN 1364-8535; Online ISSN 1466-609X)

Critical Care    June 2002 Vol 6 No 3
Yildiz et al.
Steroid therapy in patients with sepsis is still controversial.
In the 1960s, stress doses of hydrocortisone for the treat-
ment of sepsis were investigated, but no advantages could
be shown in a double-blind multicenter study [8]. This led
to the discontinuation of steroid replacement therapy for
sepsis. In the 1970s, therapy with pharmacological doses
of glucocorticoids was widely used in patients with sepsis
and septic shock. The most compelling evidence in favor of
corticosteroid trea
