Study ID: Dorresteijn 2008_2008
Outcome: Relapse at 12 months
Data Type: binary

===ABSTRACT===
Abstract We performed a multi-centre randomized con-
trolled trial to compare the efficacy of mycophenolate
mofetil (MMF) to that of cyclosporine A (CsA) in treating
children with frequently relapsing nephrotic syndrome and
biopsy-proven minimal change disease. Of the 31 random-
ized initially selected patients, seven were excluded. The
remaining 24 children received either MMF 1200 mg/m2
per day (n=12) or CsA 4–5 mg/kg per day (n=12) during a
12-month period. Of the 12 patients in the MMF group, two
discontinued the study medication. Evaluation of the
changes from the baseline glomerular filtration rate showed
an overall significant difference in favour of MMF over the
treatment period (p=0.03). Seven of the 12 patients in the
MMF group and 11 of the 12 patients in the CsA group
remained in complete remission during the entire study
period. Relapse rate in the MMF group was 0.83/year
compared to 0.08/year in the CsA group (p=0.08). None of
the patients reported diarrhea. Pharmacokinetic profiles of
mycophenolic acid were performed in seven patients. The
patient with the lowest area under the curve had three
relapses within 6 months. In children with frequently
relapsing minimal change nephrotic syndrome, MMF has
a favourable side effect profile compared to CsA; however,
there is a tendency towards a higher relapse risk in patients
treated with MMF.
Keywords Child . Cyclosporine . Frequent relapsing .
Mycophenolate mofetil . Nephrotic syndrome
Introduction
Nephrotic syndrome 

===RESULTS===
results from several uncontrolled studies have
recently suggested a positive effect of the relatively new
immunosuppressive drug mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) in
preventing relapses in children with frequently relapsing
Pediatr Nephrol (2008) 23:2013–2020
DOI 10.1007/s00467-008-0899-6
E. M. Dorresteijn (*): J. Nauta: A. J. van der Heijden
Department of Pediatric Nephrology,
Erasmus Medical Center/Sophia Children’s Hospital,
Dr Molewaterplein 60,
3015 GJ Rotterdam, the Netherlands
e-mail: e.dorresteijn@erasmusmc.nl
J. E. Kist-van Holthe
Department of Pediatric Nephrology,
Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, the Netherlands
E. N. Levtchenko
Department of Pediatric Nephrology,
University Hospital Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium
W. C. J. Hop
Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics,
Erasmus Medical Center Rotterdam,
Rotterdam, the Netherlands

nephrotic syndrome due to minimal changes and various
other nephropathies [12–21]. Mycophenolate mofetil inhibits
inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase, an enzyme required
for the de novo pathway of purine synthesis which, in turn, is
essential for the proliferation of B and T lymphocytes. In
contrast with CsA, MMF has no known nephrotoxic side
effects. To the best of our knowledge, there are currently no
randomized controlled studies comparing the efficacy of
MMF and CsA in treating nephrotic syndrome in children or
adults. Furthermore, pharmacokinetic profiles of MMF in
children are scarce and mainly concern renal transplant
recipients using multiple drugs [22, 23].
We performed a randomized controlled trial to study the
efficacy and side effects of MMF compared to CsA in
children with frequently relapsing nephrotic syndrome and
biopsy proven minimal change disease.
Methods
General outline of the study
This was a multi-centre randomized controlled trial aimed
at studying the efficacy and side effects of MMF compared
to CsA in children with frequently relapsing nephrotic
syndrome. We also performed a pharmacokinetic study of
MMF. P
