Study ID: Corral-Gudino 2021_2021
Outcome: 28-day all-cause mortality
Data Type: binary

===ABSTRACT===


===RESULTS===
Results A total of 91 patients were screened, and 64
were randomized (mean age70± 12 years). In the ITT
analysis, 14 of 29 patients (48%) in the SOC group and
14 of 35 (40%) in the MP group suffered the composite
endpoint (40% versus 20% in patients under 72 years
and 67% versus 48% in those over 72 years; p= 0.25).
In the PP analysis, patients on MP had a signiﬁcantly
lower risk of experiencing the composite endpoint
(age-adjusted risk ratio 0.42; 95% conﬁdence interval,
CI 0.20–0.89; p= 0.043).
Conclusion The planned sample size was not achieved,
and our results should therefore be interpreted with
caution. The use of MP had no signiﬁcant effect on
the primary endpoint in ITT analysis; however, the PP
analysis showed a beneﬁcial effect due to MP, which
consistent with other published trials support the use
of glucocorticoids in severe cases of COVID-19.
Keywords Glucocorticoids · SARS-CoV-2 · Mortality ·
Coronavirus Infections · Humans
Introduction
It has been generally admitted that corticosteroid
therapy should not be routinely recommended in
cases of viral pneumonia because the steroids might
exacerbate lung injury [1].
This is the reason why
guidance from the World Health Organization (WHO)
at the start of the SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) pandemic
advised against systematic use of corticosteroids in
COVID-19 patients [2].
The rapid clinical deterioration of severely ill
COVID-19 patients with viral pneumonia progresses
into a disorder similar to the acute respiratory dis-
tress syndrome (ARDS) with multiple organ failure
and death [3, 4]. The association of increasing inter-
leukin (IL) levels and very high acute phase reactants
[5–9] act as signals for a highly systemic inﬂammatory
response. These two ﬁndings in COVID-19 patients
have led clinicians to question the recommendations
against using corticosteroids. Besides, the potential
beneﬁt of corticosteroids in ARDS due to other causes
has prompted interest in using them in COVID-19
[10]. During the ﬁrst month of the pandemic, several
authors
recommended
prescribing
corticosteroids
based on anecdotal observations and retrospective
uncontrolled series of patients [11–14]. In contrast,
other studies argued that corticosteroids may be dele-
terious and cause delayed viral clearance in COVID-
19 patients [15] as was also found in SARS patients
[16].
On 17 July 2020, the RECOVERY trial was published
[17] in which glucocorticoid use showed a clear ben-
eﬁcial effect in patients with COVID-19 who were on
mechanical ventilation at the time of randomization
in the United Kingdom (UK). Other studies have con-
ﬁrmed a decrease in the number of ventilator-free
days (CoDEX [18]) after steroid administration.
In
addition, two studies of critically ill patients (CAPE-
COVID [19] and REMAP-CAP-COVID [20]) showed
a tendency for improvement in patients receiving cor-
ticosteroids; however, both were stopped early after
the RECOVERY publication. In contrast, METCOVID
[21] did not show differences in mortality after a short
course of methylprednisolone (MP). The evidence for
the association of systemic corticosteroids with a re-
duction in critically ill COVID patient mortality has
been summarized in two systematic reviews [22, 23].
The RECOVERY trial results showed a modest ben-
eﬁt of corticosteroids in less severely ill patients re-
ceiving oxygen without invasive mechanical ventila-
tion (IMV). No beneﬁts from the use of corticosteroids
were found in patients without respiratory support on
admission.
The lack of data in patients with moderate to se-
vere disease but not yet requiring intensive care or
mechanical respiratory support prompted us to re-
port the results of a planned interim analysis of the
patients who are included in our study to date. Data
are needed to perform meta-analyses to better char-
acterize the glucocorticoid outcomes in this subgroup
of patients who show evidence of moderate to severe
lung disease and a marked inﬂammatory response but
still do not require mechanical ventilation.
Patients, material and methods
Study design
GLUCOCOVID is a randomized, open-label, con-
trolled, two-arm, parallel-group, trial conducted at
ﬁve hospitals in Spain (Hospital Universitario Mar-
qués de Valdecilla, Hospital Universitario Río Hort-
ega, Hospital El Bierzo, Hospital Laredo, and Hospital
Sierrallana). The study was designed to address the
efﬁcacy of adding MP to standard therapy in patients
with moderate to severe COVID-19.
We designed a pragmatic, randomized trial. In ad-
dition to the randomized trial, we also collected data
from patients who had not been randomized either
because the patient had a treatment preference or be-
cause their doctor preferred a speciﬁc treatment. The
304
Short course corticosteroids in COVID-19
K

original article
data from the patients included in this preference arm
were analyzed separately from the data of the patients
included in the randomized clinical trial. The reason
for including this preference arm was an attempt to
av
