Study ID: Clarke-Moloney 2014_2014
Outcome: Reulceration
Data Type: binary

===ABSTRACT===
Abstract
The aim of this study was to determine the rate of venous ulcer recurrence and the
level of compliance in patients wearing European class 1 or class 2 compression
stockings. A total of 100 patients with healed venous leg ulcers were recruited, and
were randomised to either class 1 (n = 50) or class 2 (n = 50) compression stockings.
Follow-up was at 1 week, 3, 6, 9 and 12 months to monitor ulcer recurrence and com-
pliance. Patients had a duplex scan to identify the source of venous incompetence. The
rate of ulcer recurrence after 12 months was 16·1%, and the difference in recurrence
rate between classes was not statistically signiﬁcant (P = 0·287) although greater
numbers in class 1 developed a recurrence. Participants (88·9%) were compliant;
non-compliant patients were at a signiﬁcantly greater risk of recurrence (P ≤0·0001).
Thirteen patients had both superﬁcial and deep incompetence; those randomised to
class 1 stockings (n = 4) developed ulcer recurrence. Patients with a history of mul-
tiple episodes of ulceration were more likely to develop a recurrence (P = 0·001).
The lowest venous ulcer recurrence rates were seen in patients who were compliant
with hosiery regardless of the compression level. Patients with both superﬁcial and
deep incompetence had a lower rate of recurrence with class 2 compression.
Introduction
Venous leg ulceration is a debilitating, chronic condition
affecting 1–2% of the older population; healing venous ulcers
can be slow and labour inte

===RESULTS===
results were entered
sequentially into numbered, sealed envelopes, which were
assigned to consecutive patients once consented. Patients
were randomised to either European class 1 (18–21 mmHg)
(n = 50) or class 2 (23–32 mmHg) (n = 50) compression
stockings once the ulcer had healed. The stockings used were
Mediven® elegance (closed toe) or Mediven® plus (open
toe) (Royale Distributing Agency, Dublin, Ireland). These
stockings were chosen as they were commonly prescribed
in both hospital and community clinics at the time of study
recruitment. Patients were measured for the stockings and
given a choice of colour and option of closed or open toe.
All patients were educated on stocking wear including the
importance of wearing stockings, how to get into and remove
them and stocking maintenance. Following randomisation,
all patients participating in the study were invited to attend
University Hospital Limerick at some stage during the study
period, to have a duplex scan of their legs to determine venous
incompetence. Patients were followed up at 1 week, 3, 6, 9 and
12 months to monitor for ulcer recurrence, and a questionnaire
was completed on compliance and the patients’ experience of
wearing the stockings. The questionnaire included questions
on how often the patients wore the stockings (all day every day
– removing at night time, some part of every day, some days,
all day and all night); on how easy it was to independently get
into and remove the stockings or if they required assistance,
and whether wearing the stockings limited their activities of
daily living. The patients were also asked to score their overall
experience of wearing compression stockings on a visual
analogue scale (VAS), ranging from 1 to 10; 1 translating
as a very poor experience to 10 relating to excellent. Figure 1
illustrates the questionnaire used.
Patients attended a hospital outpatients clinic for review by
the vascular team if they wished to consider having superﬁcial
venous surgery.
Statisti
