Study ID: Mohamed 2023_2023
Outcome: 28-day all-cause mortality
Data Type: binary

===ABSTRACT===
ABSTRACT—Purpose: The aim of the study is to evaluate the effect of combined hydrocortisone, vitamin C, and thiamine (triple
therapy) on the mortality of patients with septic shock. Methods: This multicenter, open-label, two-arm parallel-group, random-
ized controlled trial was conducted in four intensive care units in Qatar. Adult patients diagnosed with septic shock requiring nor-
epinephrine at a rate of ≥0.1 μg/kg/min for ≥6 h were randomized to a triple therapy group or a control group. The primary out-
come was in-hospital mortality at 60 days or at discharge, whichever occurred first. Secondary outcomes included time to death,
change in Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score at 72 h of randomization, intensive care unit length of stay, hos-
pital length of stay, and vasopressor duration. Results: A total of 106 patients (53 in each group) were enrolled in this study. The
study was terminated early because of a lack of funding. The median baseline SOFA score was 10 (interquartile range, 8–12).
The primary outcomes were similar between the two groups (triple therapy, 28.3% vs. control, 35.8%; P = 0.41). Vasopressor
duration among the survivors was similar between the two groups (triple therapy, 50 h vs. control, 58 h; P = 0.44). Other second-
ary and safety endpoints were similar between the two groups. Conclusion: Triple therapy did not improve in-hospital mortality
at 60 days in critically ill patients with septic shock or reduce the vasopressor duration or S

===RESULTS===
Results: A total of 106 patients (53 in each group) were enrolled in this study. The
study was terminated early because of a lack of funding. The median baseline SOFA score was 10 (interquartile range, 8–12).
The primary outcomes were similar between the two groups (triple therapy, 28.3% vs. control, 35.8%; P = 0.41). Vasopressor
duration among the survivors was similar between the two groups (triple therapy, 50 h vs. control, 58 h; P = 0.44). Other second-
ary and safety endpoints were similar between the two groups. Conclusion: Triple therapy did not improve in-hospital mortality
at 60 days in critically ill patients with septic shock or reduce the vasopressor duration or SOFA score at 72 h. Trial Registration:
ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT03380507. Registered on December 21, 2017.
KEYWORDS—Ascorbic acid; hydrocortisone; septic shock; thiamine; vitamin C
BACKGROUND
Despite recent medical advances, sepsis and septic shock re-
main major causes of death (1,2). Approximately 20% of deaths
worldwide are associated with sepsis (2). In addition, mortality
from septic shock is approximately 30%–40% as reported in a re-
cent meta-analysis of 71 studies (3). There is an ongoing effort to
identify novel therapies or repurposed medications to improve
outcomes in patients with sepsis and septic shock.
Low plasma levels of ascorbic acid (vitamin C) have been as-
sociated with multiorgan dysfunction in critically ill patients
(4–6). Several studies have demonstrated the safety and benefits
of using vitamin C to treat critically ill patients, including a
dose-dependent decrease in the Sequential Organ Failure Assess-
ment (SOFA) score, lower vasopressor doses and duration, and
lower fluid resuscitation requirements (7–10).
A small study demonstrated that septic shock is associated
with thiamine deficiency (11). Donnino et al. showed that intrave-
nous thiamine decreased lactate levels and mortality in a sub-
group of patients with thiamine deficiency, but this finding was
n
