Study ID: Fernández-Serrano 2011_2011
Outcome: 28-day all-cause mortality
Data Type: binary

===ABSTRACT===
Abstract
Introduction: The benefit of corticosteroids as adjunctive treatment in patients with severe community-acquired
pneumonia (CAP) requiring hospital admission remains unclear. This study aimed to evaluate the impact of
corticosteroid treatment on outcomes in patients with CAP.
Methods: This was a prospective, double-blind and randomized study. All patients received treatment with
ceftriaxone plus levofloxacin and methyl-prednisolone (MPDN) administered randomly and blindly as an initial
bolus, followed by a tapering regimen, or placebo.
Results: Of the 56 patients included in the study, 28 (50%) were treated with concomitant corticosteroids. Patients
included in the MPDN group show a more favourable evolution of the pO2/FiO2 ratio and faster decrease of fever,
as well as greater radiological improvement at seven days. The time to resolution of morbidity was also
significantly shorter in this group. Six patients met the criteria for mechanical ventilation (MV): five in the placebo
group (22.7%) and one in the MPDN group (4.3%). The duration of MV was 13 days (interquartile range 7 to 26
days) for the placebo group and three days for the only case in the MPDN group. The differences did not reach
statistical significance. Interleukin (IL)-6 and C-reactive protein (CRP) showed a significantly quicker decrease after 24
h of treatment among patients treated with MPDN. No differences in mortality were found among groups.
Conclusions: MPDN treatment, in combination with antibi

===RESULTS===
Results: Of the 56 patients included in the study, 28 (50%) were treated with concomitant corticosteroids. Patients
included in the MPDN group show a more favourable evolution of the pO2/FiO2 ratio and faster decrease of fever,
as well as greater radiological improvement at seven days. The time to resolution of morbidity was also
significantly shorter in this group. Six patients met the criteria for mechanical ventilation (MV): five in the placebo
group (22.7%) and one in the MPDN group (4.3%). The duration of MV was 13 days (interquartile range 7 to 26
days) for the placebo group and three days for the only case in the MPDN group. The differences did not reach
statistical significance. Interleukin (IL)-6 and C-reactive protein (CRP) showed a significantly quicker decrease after 24
h of treatment among patients treated with MPDN. No differences in mortality were found among groups.
Conclusions: MPDN treatment, in combination with antibiotics, improves respiratory failure and accelerates the
timing of clinical resolution of severe CAP needing hospital admission.
Trial Registration: International Standard Randomized Controlled Trials Register, ISRCTN22426306.
Introduction
Despite advances in diagnostic methods and antibiotic
treatment, community-acquired pneumonia (CAP)
remains an important cause of mortality [1-3]. In the
industrialized countries, CAP is the sixth highest cause
of mortality and the first among infectious diseases.
Although mortality in patients with CAP fell dramati-
cally with the introduction of antibiotics in the 1950s,
since then it has remained relatively stable. Current ser-
ies report an overall mortality rate of 8 to 15% [4-6].
A recent study [7] of the factors associated with early
death in patients with CAP reinforces the classical con-
cept that some deaths were not due to failure to eradi-
cate the microorganism causing CAP, but are closely
related to inadequate host response [8]. Excessive cyto-
kine response in patients with severe CAP has been
linked in many previous studies with deleterious effects
and poor prognosis [9-13].
In this context, the use of immunomodulation appears
to be an appealing option for improving prognosis in
CAP. Theoretically, an anti-inflammatory treatment
given prior to antibiotic therapy could prevent an exces-
sive inflammatory response, improving the prognosis of
more severe episodes of CAP. Therefore, the use of cor-
ticosteroids as an adjunct therapy for pneumonia has
* Correspondence: jodorca@bellvitgehospital.cat
1Respiratory Medicine Department, Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, Institut
d’Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge (IDIBELL), University of Barcelona, Feixa
Llarga s/n, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat 08907, Barcelona, Spain
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
Fernández-Serrano et al. Critical Care 2011, 15:R96
http://ccforum.com/content/15/2/R96
© 2011 Fernández-Serrano et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

been a matter of debate [14-16]. Corticosteroids are
known to reduce the production of the main inflamma-
tory cytokines (TNFa, IL-1b, IL-8, and IL-6), and the
subsequent recruitment of inflammatory cells into the
alveolar space leading to a more equilibrated response.
Here we conducted a prospective, randomized, double
blind, placebo-controlled trial to analyse whether a cor-
ticosteroid therapy, administered in the form of a
methyl-prednisolone bolus given prior to antibiotic
treatment followed by sustained infusion for nine days,
was able to modulate the inflammatory response and
clinical outcome of selected hospital-admitted CAP
patients presenting respiratory failure and extensive
radiological consolidations.
Materials and methods
Setting, study design and subjects
This study was conducted at the Hospital Universitari
de Bellvitge, a 900-bed hospital in Barcelona, Spain,
which serves a population of about 1,100,000 people.
The study was prospective, double-blind and rando-
mized. Patients admitted to the hospital with CAP, and
who met the selection criteria and agreed to participate
in the study, were assigned to receive either placebo or
methyl-prednisolone (MPDN) in combination with
empirical antibiotic treatment.
CAP was diagnosed according to conventional criteria
previously reported elsewhere [9]. Inclusion criteria
were: 1) extensive radiological consolidations (comple-
tely affecting at least two lobes); and 2) respiratory fail-
ure (pO2/FiO2 <300). Exclusion criteria included: 1) age
<18 years and >75 years; 2) no written informed consent
available; 3) known hypersensitivity to steroids; 4) ster-
oid treatment in the previous 48 h; 5) need for steroid
treatment for any reason (asthma, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease
