=== TANAKA 2018 ===
Results: Of the 112 randomized participants, 93 (83.0%) and 81 (72.3%) completed 8-week and 
12-week visits, respectively. Intention-to-treat analysis demonstrated significantly larger 8-week 
weight loss in the coaching group (−1.4 kg; 95% confidence interval [CI]: −2.0, −0.8 kg) than 
that in the control group (−0.1 kg; 95% CI: −0.6, 0.4 kg). Significantly larger improvements 
in triglyceride and glycated hemoglobin A1c levels were also obtained in the coaching group. 
These benefits, except for the triglyceride level, were maintained until week 12. The frequent 
upload of meal photos was associated with a larger 8-week weight loss in a dose–response 
fashion (P-value for trend <0.001).
Conclusion: This smartphone-delivered commercial weight loss program characterized as 
dietary coaching via group chat resulted in modest but significant weight loss. Facilitating 
participants’ active involvement in the program is necessary to achieve greater health 
benefits.
Keywords: specific health guidance, technology-enhanced program, meal photo upload
Introduction
Body weight loss and its maintenance remain important challenges in clinical and 
public health settings.1,2 Most of the clinical guidelines for obesity recommend 
dietary restriction as a first-line treatment option before proceeding to more intensive 
modalities such as pharmacotherapy and bariatric surgery.2–5 In public health practices, 
weight control via dietary modification is also highly recommended. In April 2008, 

=== JOTHINATH 2021 ===
Results—Among the 1,459 participants allocated to STC (N=509) or PCC 
(N=950), there were no differences in clinical and demographic characteristics. Self-reported 
prevalences were available for HIV (42%), HCV (57%), and prior tuberculosis (17%). Study 
retention at 6, 12, 18, and 24 months was as 91%, 85%, 80%, and 74%, respectively.
Conclusion—PWID have a high prevalence of medical comorbidities and integrating OAT into 
primary care settings has the potential to improve the health of PWID. Findings from this study 
can help guide implementation of integrated care in Ukraine and throughout similar low-resource, 
high-burden countries in the Eastern European and Central Asian region.
Keywords
Opioid Agonist Therapies (OAT); People who inject drugs (PWID); Opioids; integrated care; 
Implementation science; Ukraine
1. Introduction
Despite reductions in HIV globally, HIV incidence and mortality are increasing in the 
Eastern Europe and Central Asian (EECA) region. Like other EECA countries, Ukraine’s 
HIV epidemic is concentrated among people who inject drugs (PWID). The majority 
of PWID in Ukraine use illicit opioids and meet the diagnostic criteria of opioid use 
disorder.1 PWID experience poor health outcomes, including HIV, HCV, and tuberculosis 
comorbidities, overdose, hospitalizations,2–4 and increased morbidity and mortality, mostly 
from diseases that can be screened for and managed in primary care settings.5,6
Maintenance with opioid agonist therapies (OAT) using me