Pages: 22
--- PAGE 1 ---
Improving AIDS Care after Trauma (ImpACT): Pilot outcomes of a 
coping intervention among HIV-infected women with sexual 
trauma in South Africa
Kathleen J. Sikkema1,2,3, Marta I. Mulawa1, Corne Robertson3, Melissa H. Watt1, Nonceba 
Ciya3, Dan J. Stein3, Emily M. Cherenack1,2, Karmel W. Choi1,2, Matapelo Kombora3, and 
John A. Joska3
1Duke Global Health Institute, Duke University, Durham, NC
2Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, NC
3Department of Psychiatry and Mental Health, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa
Abstract
Improving AIDS Care after Trauma (ImpACT), a coping intervention for HIV-infected women 
with sexual abuse histories, was evaluated for feasibility and potential efficacy in a public clinic in 
Cape Town, South Africa. Sixty-four participants were enrolled prior to starting antiretroviral 
therapy (ART). After completing baseline assessments, participants were randomly assigned to 
standard of care (SoC: three adherence counseling sessions) or ImpACT (SoC plus four individual 
and three group sessions). Participants completed assessments at 3 months (after individual 
sessions) and 6 months post-baseline. In exploratory analysis of primary outcomes, ImpACT 
participants, compared to SoC, reported greater reductions in avoidance and arousal symptoms of 
PTSD and greater increases in ART adherence motivation at 3 months. Clinically significant 
decreases in overall PTSD symptoms were also demonstrated at 3 months. These effects continued 
as trends at the 6-month assessment, in addition to increases in social/spiritual coping. In analysis 
of secondary outcomes, high levels of non-adherence to ART and poor care engagement were 
evident at 6 months, with no differences between study arms. A trauma-focused, culturally-
adapted individual intervention delivered by a non-specialist in the HIV care setting is feasible and 
acceptable. Preliminary findings suggest ImpACT has potential to reduce PTSD symptoms and 
increase ART adherence motivation, but a more intensive intervention may be needed to improve 
and maintain care engagement among this population.
Correspondence: Kathleen J. Sikkema, Duke University, Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, 417 Chapel Drive, Box 90086, 
Durham, NC 27708-0086, kathleen.sikkema@duke.edu. 
Compliance with Ethical Standards
Conflict of Interest : All authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.
Trial Registration : ClinicalTrials.gov NCT02223390
Ethical approval : All procedures performed in studies involving human participants were in accordance with the ethical standards of 
the institutional and/or national research committee and with the 1964 Helsinki declaration and its later amendments or comparable 
ethical standards. (Duke C0147, UCT 071/2014)
Informed consent : Informed consent was obtained from all individual participants included in the study.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
AIDS Behav . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 01.
Published in final edited form as:
AIDS Behav . 2018 March ; 22(3): 1039–1052. doi:10.1007/s10461-017-2013-1.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
--- PAGE 2 ---
Keywords
South Africa; HIV; Sexual violence; Traumatic stress; Adherence
INTRODUCTION
Individuals living with HIV report disproportionately high levels of interpersonal trauma and 
have higher rates of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) than the general population ( 1, 2). 
The psychosocial and behavioral sequelae that result from traumatic experiences can 
significantly impact HIV care-seeking behaviors and clinical outcomes ( 3–6). Despite this, 
the evidence base for trauma-focused interventions among HIV-infected individuals is 
limited ( 7, 8). A comprehensive review ( 7) identified only two interventions that have 
empirical support for the treatment of trauma-related symptoms in this population ( 9, 10): 
one of prolonged exposure therapy ( 11) and the other based on stress and coping ( 12) in 
combination with components of trauma-focused cognitive behavioral therapy. Both studies 
were evaluated in the United States, and neither intervention focused on nor examined HIV 
care engagement as an outcome ( 9, 10). As the global community strives to meet the 
90-90-90 target (including 90% on antiretroviral therapy and 90% virally suppressed), there 
is a need to develop and evaluate trauma-focused interventions that can support sustained 
HIV care engagement among individuals with trauma histories in low- and middle-income 
countries (LMICs).
In South Africa, where HIV prevalence is particularly high ( 13), sexual trauma, including 
childhood and adult sexual abuse, is common in the general population and is likely elevated 
among women living with HIV ( 1, 14). In a clinic-based screening of women in HIV care in 
South Africa, 51% reported a history of sexual abuse (23% during childhood/adolescence 
and 37% during adulthood) ( 15). An HIV diagnosis and a history of sexual trauma can lead 
to compounded shame and stigma and impact HIV care engagement ( 16, 17). This was 
evident in qualitative work in South Africa ( 18), where women with sexual trauma histories 
often experienced a delay of several years between HIV diagnosis and enrollment in HIV 
care. This delay was attributed to feelings of shame related to recent or ongoing sexual 
trauma experiences. In many cases, women attributed their HIV infection directly to their 
experiences of sexual abuse. Once engaged in HIV care, women continued to face barriers; 
several women noted how taking antiretroviral therapy (ART) brought up disturbing 
memories of the sexual trauma, and no women had disclosed their sexual trauma to an HIV 
care provider ( 18).
Traumatic stress symptoms, such as avoidance ( 19) and dissociation ( 20, 21) may persist for 
years after the occurrence of sexual trauma and impact women’s capacity to fully engage in 
HIV care ( 22). In addition, co-morbid mental health disorders, such as depression, anxiety 
disorder, and substance use may further interfere with care ( 23–25). The impact of sexual 
trauma on HIV care engagement has implications for clinical outcomes ( 26–28), explaining 
in part why individuals with traumatic histories progress faster to AIDS and face more 
AIDS-related mortality ( 22, 29, 30).Sikkema et al. Page 2
AIDS Behav . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
--- PAGE 3 ---
Addressing the impact of sexual trauma on HIV care behaviors and outcomes requires a 
model of trauma-informed care, whereby trauma is recognized (typically through routine 
screening), targeted interventions are delivered, and referrals are made to specialized 
services ( 31, 32). To date, no trauma-informed interventions to promote HIV care 
engagement in LMICs have been identified ( 33), although evaluation of an intervention for 
HIV-infected women with histories of gender-based violence is on-going in Kenya ( 34, 35). 
A major issue in trauma-informed care models in LMICs is the availability of specialized 
personnel to deliver interventions, and the resources and time available for supplemental 
interventions. This necessitates that interventions should be designed for delivery by non-
specialized health care providers or lay providers, an approach known as task-shifting or 
task-sharing ( 36, 37), and that they should be easily integrated into the existing care delivery 
structure. To address the unique needs of HIV-infected women who have a history of sexual 
trauma, it is necessary to develop brief and scalable approaches to address the accumulated 
impacts of trauma, in order to help them develop strategies for long-term HIV care 
engagement.
The goal of this study was to conduct a pilot clinical trial of a newly developed 7-session 
psychological intervention (4 individual sessions and 3 group sessions) for HIV-infected 
women with sexual abuse histories, in a low-resource, primary care setting to 1) determine 
the feasibility and acceptability of the intervention, 2) explore the potential efficacy of the 
intervention on mental health (primary outcomes) and HIV care engagement (secondary 
outcomes) as ART is initiated, and 3) assess the feasibility of conducting a full scale 
randomized controlled trial.
METHODS
Participants and Setting
HIV-infected women newly initiating ART were recruited between March 2016 and January 
2017 from a primary health care clinic in a peri-urban township of Cape Town, South Africa, 
serving an impoverished and densely populated area. Community resources and local 
infrastructure are limited, and socioeconomic indicators point to high rates of poverty and 
hardship. One-third of residents completed Grade 12 education, 38% were unemployed, 
78% reported an annual household income below 3,200 South African rand (approx US 
$225), and 56% live in informal dwellings ( 38). The clinic is one of the public service HIV 
treatment centers where patients receive free HIV care, including ART. At the time of the 
study, the clinic had a total patient load of over 2,500 adult HIV patients. ART initiation at 
the clinic follows a standard protocol as per South African government guidelines ( 39). 
After receiving an HIV diagnosis, patients are clinically assessed based on current ART 
initiation criteria (i.e., CD4 <= 500 cells/mm3, AIDS defining illness). Patients who do not 
yet meet ART initiation criteria receive care and regular assessments (e.g., CD4 count 
monitoring) in the Wellness sub-clinic until they meet the ART initiation criteria. Patients 
who meet ART initiation criteria typically receive three sessions of adherence “readiness” 
counseling, after which they are to initiate ART.
Women were eligible to participate in the study if they met the following criteria: (1) HIV-
infected and meeting ART initiation criteria; (2) history of sexual abuse, defined as sexual Sikkema et al. Page 3
AIDS Behav . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
--- PAGE 4 ---
abuse or assault that occurred during childhood, adolescence or adulthood, based on the 
WHO CIDI ( 40) and the Childhood Trauma Questionnaire ( 41); (3) 18 years or older; ( 4) 
Xhosa speaking; and ( 5) accessing HIV care services at the study clinic. Suicidal ideation 
and severity were assessed using items adapted from the suicidality subscale of the Mini 
International Neuropsychiatric Interview ( 42). Women with current suicidal intent were 
excluded and referred for psychiatric treatment. Suicidal risk was assessed throughout the 
study, and referrals provided as needed. A target sample size of 60 was chosen as adequate 
to examine the feasibility and acceptability of a pilot RCT with two conditions ( 43). 
Reporting of study methods and results followed the CONSORT 2010 statement, as extend 
to pilot randomized controlled trials ( 44).
Procedures
All women who were eligible for ART initiation were referred to the study by the Wellness 
sub-clinic staff. Study staff consented and screened patients for eligibility based on reported 
sexual abuse history. Potential participants were informed of the study focus on sexual 
trauma following completion of the screening.
Patients who met eligibility criteria and gave written informed consent to the trial were 
scheduled to complete the baseline assessment (typically within 1 – 5 days following 
screening), prior to receiving the standard adherence counseling sessions. Participants were 
randomly assigned (1:1) to the standard of care control condition (SoC: 3 adherence 
“readiness” sessions) or the experimental intervention condition (SoC, plus ImpACT) using 
a small block (size 8 or 10) randomization procedure. Condition assignments were placed in 
sealed envelopes, blinded to study staff until assignment. Due to the nature of the 
intervention conditions, neither participants nor staff could be blinded to condition 
assignment. All participants completed follow-up assessments at 3-months and 6-months 
after baseline to comprise a 6-month study period. Interviewer-administered assessments 
were conducted within a private room in the clinic and lasted approximately 90 minutes. 
Participants were remunerated R100 (approx. $8) for each assessment and R50 (approx. $4) 
for each ImpACT intervention session. All study procedures were approved by the 
institutional review boards at both participating institutions. The trial was registered at 
ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT02223390).
Figure 1 displays the CONSORT flow diagram of participant progress through the phases of 
the study. Of the 138 who completed screening, 79 (57.2%) met eligibility criteria for the 
study. Of the eligible patients, 64 (81.0%) were enrolled and completed the baseline 
assessment. Retention in the 3- and/or 6-month assessment was 85.9% and no significant 
differences by study condition in the percentage of participants lost to follow-up were 
observed. Participants lost to follow-up at the 6-month assessment were significantly more 
likely than those retained to have reported hazardous drinking (69.2% vs. 37.3%, p = 0.04) 
and recent physical intimate partner violence at baseline (46.2% vs. 17.65%, p = 0.03).
Study Conditions
ImpACT Intervention— The development of ImpACT was guided by an evidence-based, 
trauma-focused stress and coping intervention among HIV-infected adults ( 10, 45, 46), and Sikkema et al. Page 4
AIDS Behav . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
--- PAGE 5 ---
culturally adapted using extensive formative research ( 18). The intervention was designed to 
reduce traumatic stress and improve HIV care engagement by developing effective strategies 
for coping with HIV and trauma, and enhancing adherence to ART, but was not singularly 
intended as a treatment for PTSD. The time of ART initiation was viewed as a ‘window of 
opportunity’ to improve HIV care engagement and set the stage for sustained adherence to 
ART. ImpACT was developed for integration in a primary care clinic in a low resource 
setting. As such, the intervention was brief, focused, and delivered by a lay provider (non-
specialist in mental health). The provider was trained by the study PI and coordinator to 
facilitate ImpACT using an intervention manual, participant workbook and culturally 
tailored visual aids, and received ongoing supervision from a South African clinical 
psychologist. Individual supervision was conducted on a weekly basis and included review 
of clinical notes, workbook content and reflection on intervention process.
The ImpACT intervention consisted of four individual sessions (60 minutes, on average) and 
three group sessions (90 minutes). Individual sessions typically began within one week of 
completing the standard adherence counseling (SoC, see below) and occurred weekly, as 
ART was being initiated. The first session (“Understanding the Combined Stress of Sexual 
Trauma and HIV”) addressed the commonalities of stressors in trauma and HIV , and 
provided an opportunity for the participant to discuss her experiences and related feelings. A 
values exercise was developed, based on our formative research, to identify personal 
motivations for HIV care engagement, and a “Start Strong, Stay Strong” visual theme was 
used to focus on long-term adherence to ART. The “3H (Head, Heart, and Hands) Model” 
was developed and utilized to articulate the influence of trauma and HIV on thoughts 
(“Head”), feelings (“Heart”) and relationships (“Hands”). The impact of sexual trauma on 
safety, trust, power and self-esteem (based on cognitive processing therapy) was adapted via 
a visual depiction of an Imbiza  pot, a culturally relevant community-oriented item that 
represented these constructs and provided linkages between trauma and HIV . The second 
session (“Coping that Works”) was focused on how to develop adaptive strategies. The 
“Coping Pebbles” exercise was developed to reflect the stress and coping model ( 12) and 
adapted to emphasize the emotional and physical burden of stress carried in daily life, and to 
discuss stress specific to trauma and HIV . A bag of small painted rocks represented 
changeable and unchangeable stressors; the participant selected specific stressors, and based 
on stress appraisal, worked to develop problem- and emotion-focused coping strategies that 
would reduce avoidance and be effective for coping with trauma and engaging in HIV care. 
Effective strategies included acceptance and disclosure of HIV status, communication with 
health care providers, cognitive reframing of the traumatic consequences of HIV diagnosis, 
reduction of alcohol use, addressing family conflict, and managing emotional and behavioral 
responses to abusive partners, including conflicts related to HIV testing and disclosure. The 
third session (“Coping and HIV Care”) built on all concepts from sessions 1 and 2 to 
identify behaviors and goals for successful engagement in HIV care and to address potential 
challenges and barriers that may interfere with ART adherence. Session 4 (“Impact of 
Sexual Trauma on Relationships and Next Steps”) was a review of key constructs and 
activities, notably practice of adaptive coping strategies, with a focus on relationships and 
social interactions. Continued progress was reinforced, and engaging in HIV care in light of Sikkema et al. Page 5
AIDS Behav . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
--- PAGE 6 ---
one’s values (e.g., children, family, and community) was used to frame adherence and self-
care, including as a form of empowerment.
Three subsequent group sessions were focused on consolidating concepts from ImpACT 
individual sessions, with opportunities for sharing challenges and successes, seeking social 
support, and generating coping strategies with peer input to refine strategies for adherence to 
ART and coping with HIV . The group sessions were co-facilitated by the ImpACT lay 
provider and a community care worker from the study clinic. The ImpACT intervention 
manual ( 47) is available upon request.
Fidelity to ImpACT intervention protocol:  After each session, detailed quality assurance 
worksheets were completed to document fidelity to intervention content, skills, and 
activities. Participant workbooks with session-by-session activities were completed with 
detailed notes on session content and process. The quality assurance data was reviewed 
frequently by the study coordinator, who held supervisory meetings on a regular basis.
Standard of Care (SoC) Adherence Counseling— SoC control condition participants 
received three sessions of adherence counseling, as required for patients prior to initiating 
ART in public HIV clinics in South Africa ( 39). The sessions were delivered by a clinic 
counselor and included education about HIV and ART, the importance of full engagement in 
HIV care, and strategies for HIV disclosure. The sessions typically began a week after the 
Wellness Clinic visit when patients were informed of ART eligibility, and occurred weekly. 
After completing these three sessions, patients then advanced to initiate ART, approximately 
one month after study baseline. ImpACT participants also received the SoC adherence 
counseling sessions prior to beginning the ImpACT intervention.
Feasibility and Acceptability
Study feasibility was determined by patient willingness to be screened, proportion of women 
meeting trauma criteria, and flow of participants through the study. Feasibility of 
assessments was examined through self-report and medical record abstraction. The 
acceptability of the study was evaluated using a 5-item scale included in the 6-month 
assessment, which asked about the participant’s general experience with the study, including 
their satisfaction with the amount of confidentiality and respect received, and their 
likelihood of recommending the study to other women (1=strongly disagree to 4=strongly 
agree; Cronbach’s alpha = 0.87).
Intervention feasibility was monitored through session attendance and quality assurance data 
collection on intervention fidelity and supervision. The acceptability of the intervention was 
evaluated using three measures of participant feedback at 3- and 6-month assessments: (1) 
satisfaction with intervention, facilitator, frequency and length of sessions, ability of 
intervention to address specific issues, and overall ratings (1=strongly disagree to 4=strongly 
agree; Cronbach’s alpha = 0.79); (2) ratings of usefulness of each of seven intervention 
components within the individual sessions (1=not at all useful to 5=extremely useful) 
(Cronbach’s alpha = 0.77); and (3) open ended questions on logistical challenges, manner in 
which sexual trauma was addressed, and ways in which intervention impacted adherence to 
HIV care.Sikkema et al. Page 6
AIDS Behav . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
--- PAGE 7 ---
Measures
Measures were selected based on prior use in South Africa, and were translated into Xhosa 
and back-translated into English. Formative research and cognitive interviews were 
conducted on measures of traumatic stress and coping in order to ensure respect for context, 
comprehensible literacy levels, and cultural salience.
Demographics, alcohol use, and HIV-related health characteristics:  Demographics 
included questions about the participant’s age, education, employment status, and 
relationship status. Hazardous drinking was assessed with the AUDIT-C, a three-question 
measure that evaluates frequency of drinking, quantity of drinks consumed on a typical day, 
and frequency of binge drinking ( 48). HIV related questions (date of diagnosis, CD4 count, 
attendance of readiness sessions, date of ART initiation, ARV prescription information, and 
HIV disclosure) were assessed through self-report and abstraction of medical record data.
Sexual abuse, intimate partner violence, and exposure to other traumatic 
events:  Recent sexual abuse (in addition to sexual abuse during childhood, adolescence, and 
adulthood, per inclusion criteria), defined as sexual abuse or assault that occurred within the 
past 3 months, was assessed using three items based on the WHO Composite International 
Diagnostic Interview (CIDI) ( 40) (e.g., “As an adult, did anyone ever touch you in a sexual 
way or make you touch them in a sexual way against your will, when you made it clear 
through words or actions that you did not want to? If yes, has it happened in the last 3 
months?”). Disclosure of sexual abuse or sexual violence to others, including family 
members, current partner (excluding the abuse partner), and healthcare providers was 
assessed using an adapted HIV disclosure instrument ( 49). Physical intimate partner 
violence (physical IPV) occurring in adolescence, adulthood, and within the past 3 months 
was measured using three items from the physical IPV subscale of the revised Conflict 
Tactics Scale (CTS2) ( 50) (e.g., “Has a partner ever beat, kicked or hit you?”). Exposure to 
other traumatic events in adulthood and ever was measured using five traumatic events listed 
in the PTSD module of the WHO CIDI (e.g., “Have you ever been mugged, held up, car-
jacked or threatened with a weapon?”; “Has someone very close to you died unexpectedly; 
for example, they were killed in an accident, murdered, or your son or daughter died?”) ( 40).
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD):  PCL-5 ( 51), a 20-item self-report questionnaire, 
assessed severity of symptoms that parallel DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for PTSD. 
Participants were asked to indicate the extent to which they were bothered by problems 
experienced in the past month in relation to a traumatic experience of abuse or act of 
violence (0=not at all to 4=extremely). Total severity score (Cronbach’s alpha = 0.94) and 
subscale totals (re-experiencing symptom category B; avoidance category C; negative 
alterations in cognitions and mood category D; and hyperarousal category E; Cronbach’s 
alpha = 0.88, 0.83, 0.83, and 0.83, respectively) were examined at each of the three 
assessment points.
Coping:  Coping was assessed using 43 items that were previously used to measure coping 
in Sub-Saharan Africa or among HIV-infected individuals ( 10, 52–57), in addition to 4 new 
items that were chosen based on cognitive interviewing and formative findings. Participants Sikkema et al. Page 7
AIDS Behav . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
--- PAGE 8 ---
were asked how often they used these strategies in the past month to help deal with their 
HIV illness (1 = not at all to 4 = most of the time). A principal axis factor analysis with 
direct oblimin rotation was performed on the baseline data to explore the structure of coping 
items. Five items did not logically group with any factor and were removed from further 
analysis. In total, three factors were identified, which included active coping (13 items, e.g., 
“I made a plan and have taken steps to improve the situation”; Cronbach’s alpha = 0.83), 
avoidant coping (16 items, e.g., “I bottled by feelings inside”; Cronbach’s alpha = 0.79), and 
social/spiritual coping (13 items, e.g., “I talked with others with problems like mine”; 
Cronbach’s alpha = 0.78).
Adherence Motivation:  Motivation to take ART was measured using an adapted subscale 
of the LifeWindows Information-Motivation-Behavioral Skills ART Adherence 
Questionnaire (LW-IMB-AAQ) ( 58). The LW-IMB-AAQ was developed to identify barriers 
to ART adherence among HIV-infected patients. The personal motivation subscale measures 
attitudes and beliefs about the impact of ART medication and the daily burden of ART 
adherence. For the present study, five items were included based on their relevance to South 
African women in a clinic setting, and a new item was added to measure the perceived 
difficulty of being able to take HIV medications with food as prescribed. The final scale 
included six questions with responses ranging from 1 = strongly disagree to 5 = strongly 
agree (Cronbach’s alpha = 0.76). All six questions were reverse-scored and summed to 
obtain a total score with a possible range of 6 to 30, with larger values indicating greater 
motivation to take ART.
HIV care engagement:  HIV care engagement was measured using self-reported ART 
adherence and medical record abstraction. Any self-reported non-adherence was evaluated 
by asking the participant how many days she missed taking her medication within the past 
month ( 59). Using the abstracted medical record data, retention in care was measured by 
computing days between consecutive kept HIV-related visits and assessing whether 60 days 
or more elapsed between any two visits or between the participant’s last kept visit and the 
end of the study window ( 60). Additionally, the viral load data abstracted from medical 
records was dichotomized as suppressed (<1,000 copies/ml) or not suppressed ( ≥ 1,000 
copies/ml) ( 61). Data was abstracted for the first assessment of viral load, typically 3–4 
months post ART initiation, and thus the test result most approximate to the 6-month 
assessment.
Exploratory Data Analysis to Evaluate Potential Intervention Efficacy
Study data were double-entered using REDCap, a secure, web-based application hosted at 
Duke University ( 62). Descriptive statistics were used to characterize the sample at baseline, 
with t tests and χ2 tests examining between-group differences for continuous and categorical 
variables, respectively. The conditions were compared based on demographic factors, abuse 
histories, and HIV history.
Although exploratory in approach, our primary hypotheses examined the short term effects 
of ImpACT on mental health outcomes. To assess the changes in PTSD symptoms, coping, 
and adherence motivation by intervention condition, linear mixed models were fit using the Sikkema et al. Page 8
AIDS Behav . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
--- PAGE 9 ---
PROC MIXED procedure in SAS software version 9.4 (SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, NC). To 
explore differences between conditions in clinically significant change of PTSD symptoms, 
χ2 tests compared proportions of participants with a > 20 point reduction in the total severity 
score from baseline to 3-month and baseline to 6-month assessments ( 63). Participants were 
retained in these analyses regardless of intervention exposure, following an intent-to-treat 
analysis of the outcomes.
For our secondary outcomes, analysis of self-reported adherence excluded participants who 
did not initiate ART (n= 4 in ImpACT and n= 3 in SoC), and care engagement measures 
excluded both participants who did not initiate ART and those who officially transferred care 
to another clinic (n= 2 in ImpACT and n= 2 in SoC). To explore differences in adherence 
and care engagement, χ2 tests compared proportions between conditions at 3-month and 6-
month.
RESULTS
Sample Characteristics
Characteristics of the study sample are described in Table 1. The average age of participants 
was 29.1 years (SD = 7.5) and most participants (78.1%) had not completed high school. 
While a quarter of participants reported current employment and a few reported occasional 
work, the majority of participants (68.7%) were unemployed. More than half (59.4%) were 
in relationship but not living with their partner, 15.6% were living with a partner, and 12.5% 
were married. Four participants were single (6.3%) and four were separated or divorced 
(6.3%) at baseline.
High rates of sexual abuse were reported across the life course, with 18.8% of participants 
reporting sexual abuse in childhood, nearly half (48.4%) reporting sexual abuse in 
adolescence, and over three-quarters (76.6%) reporting sexual abuse in adulthood. Moreover, 
40.6% of participants reported experiencing sexual abuse within the last three months at 
baseline. While more than half of participants (54.7%) had disclosed at least one sexual 
abuse experience to a family member, only 9.4% had ever told a health care provider about 
their history of sexual abuse. Prevalence of lifetime physical intimate partner violence was 
also high (84.4%), with 23.4% of the sample experiencing physical IPV within the last 3 
months at baseline. Nearly the entire sample (92.2%) reported exposure to other traumatic 
events, with 87.5% reporting exposure in adulthood.
Most of the study participants were recently diagnosed with HIV , with 53.1% diagnosed 
within the last one month and 57.8% diagnosed within the last three months of enrolling in 
the study. The overall proportion of women who had disclosed their HIV status was high, 
with 92.2% of participants having told somebody about their diagnosis. However, 25.0% of 
participants with a current partner reported not having disclosed their HIV status to this 
partner. The average CD4 count of study participants at the time of ART initiation was 317.9 
cells/μl. Based on medical record review, 87.5% of SoC participants and 90.6% of ImpACT 
participants completed the three adherence counseling sessions required for ART initiation. 
Overall, 10.9% of participants did not initiate ART during the study period. Of the Sikkema et al. Page 9
AIDS Behav . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
--- PAGE 10 ---
participants who initiated ART, 94.6% were on a fixed dose combination (FDC) with 
tenofovir (TDF), emtricitabine (FTC) and efavirenz (EFV).
No significant differences for any of these sample characteristics were observed between 
treatment conditions.
Intervention Trial Feasibility and Acceptability
Fidelity to the ImpACT intervention protocol for individual sessions was high. An 
independent coder estimated level of fidelity to the ImpACT intervention for the individual 
sessions, with 97.8% coverage specific to each session’s protocol. Due to challenges in 
group session attendance, limited quality assurance data for group sessions were available, 
although for the group sessions that were implemented, intervention fidelity was also high. 
Overall, the mean number of individual sessions attended was 3.1 (SD = 1.3; range 0 – 4), 
with 65.6% of participants attending all four sessions. Three participants (9.4%) attended 
only one session and only one attended no sessions. For group sessions, attendance was 
poor, with only 25.0% receiving any group sessions. Twenty-five percent of enrolled 
participants were referred for psychological or psychiatric services over the course of the 
study and no significant differences by study condition in the portion of participants 
receiving referrals were observed.
The mean score for overall study acceptability (range 1–4) was 3.79 at 3 months and 3.78 at 
6 months, representing high levels of study acceptability among participants in both study 
arms. Among intervention participants, the mean score for acceptability of the intervention 
(range 1–4) was 3.77 at 3-month and 3.71, also representing high levels of acceptability of 
the intervention. Ratings of the usefulness of each of seven intervention components within 
the individual sessions (range 1–5) were also high, with mean scores of 4.84 at 3-month and 
4.91 at 6-month.
Longitudinal Effects on Traumatic Stress Outcomes, Coping, and Motivation to Adhere
Means and results for overall effect of condition by time for the primary psychological 
outcomes are reported in Table 2. Mixed model parameter estimates of time effects from 
baseline to 3-month (post individual sessions) as well as baseline to 6-month revealed 
significant decreases in overall PTSD symptom severity scores and all PTSD subscales 
across both study conditions. The time by condition interaction parameter estimates revealed 
significantly greater reductions in the ImpACT arm compared to the SoC for avoidance 
symptoms of PTSD (Cluster C; F (1,43) = 5.05, p =. 03) as well as hyperarousal symptoms of 
PTSD (Cluster E; F (1,43) = 6.78, p =. 01) from baseline to 3-month. The time by condition 
interaction parameter estimate suggested a trend for greater reductions in overall PTSD 
symptom severity scores in the ImpACT arm compared to SoC from baseline to 3-month as 
well (F (1,43) = 3.15, p =. 08). In mixed models of time effects from baseline to 6-month, the 
time by condition interaction parameter estimates did not reach statistical significance, 
though results suggested a trend for greater reductions in hyperarousal symptoms of PTSD 
in the ImpACT arm compared to the SoC (Cluster E; F (2,93)  = 2.55, p =. 08).
Exploratory post-hoc analysis revealed that a significantly larger proportion of participants 
in the ImpACT arm compared to SoC had clinically significant reductions in total symptom Sikkema et al. Page 10
AIDS Behav . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
--- PAGE 11 ---
severity scores from baseline to 3-month assessments (47.4% vs. 15.4%; p =. 02). While this 
trend continued into the 6-month assessment (39.1% vs. 25.0%), the difference did not reach 
statistical significance.
Mixed model parameter estimates of time effects from baseline to 3-month as well as 
baseline to 6-month revealed significant decreases in levels of avoidant coping as well as 
significant increases in levels of social/spiritual coping and adherence motivation across both 
study arms (Table 2). Changes in the levels of active coping over time did not reach 
statistical significance. The time by condition interaction parameter estimate for social/
spiritual coping revealed marginally larger increases within the ImpACT arm compared to 
the SoC from baseline to 6-month (F (2,89)  = 2.95, p =. 06).
Additionally, significant time by condition interaction parameter estimates were observed for 
adherence motivation, suggesting participants in the ImpACT arm reported greater increases 
in their motivation to adhere to ART than those in the SoC arm from baseline to 3-month 
(F(1,42) = 4.27, p =. 05), with a potential trend observed from baseline to 6-month (F (2,89)  = 
2.40, p =. 10).
Exploration of Longitudinal Effect on Adherence and Care Engagement
Among ART initiators, high rates of non-adherence to treatment (missed medication past 
month) were reported in both conditions at 3-month (44.0% vs. 36.8% in ImpACT vs. SoC; 
χ2 (1) = 0.23, p =. 63) and 6-month (42.3% vs. 36.4% in ImpACT vs. SoC; χ2 (1) = 0.18, p 
=. 67). Medical record data also suggested high levels of non-retention in care, with 42.3% 
of ImpACT participants and 33.3% of SoC participants having a 60 day or greater gap 
between any two consecutive appointments, or between their last appointment and the end of 
their 6-month study window ( χ2 (1) = 0.45, p =. 50). Viral load data from the abstracted 
medical records, representing 3–4 months post ART initiation, revealed that among 
individuals who had viral load data, 15.8% of ImpACT participants and 20.0% of SoC 
participants had an unsuppressed viral load (i.e., ≥ 1,000 copies/ml; χ2 (1) = 0.13, p =. 72). 
However, if participants who did not initiate ART and those with poor care engagement who 
were therefore missing viral load data are assumed to have unsuppressed viral loads, and 
participants who officially transferred to another clinic are assumed to have a suppressed 
viral load, the overall proportion of study participants with unsuppressed viral loads reaches 
39.1%, suggesting low levels of viral suppression overall. Exploratory analysis revealed no 
differences on secondary outcomes of adherence and care engagement between study arms.
DISCUSSION
HIV-infected South African women initiating ART in a low-resource, public clinic reported 
high levels of sexual abuse, interpersonal trauma, and traumatic stress. A significant 
proportion of these women were newly HIV diagnosed, with experiences of sexual violence 
ongoing for many, indicative of the syndemic nature of HIV and trauma in this setting. In 
this study, we conducted an exploratory clinical trial of a culturally-adapted, task-shifted 
coping intervention, developed through formative research and based on a theoretically 
grounded, evidence-based intervention addressing HIV and trauma ( 10). ART initiation was 
conceptualized as a window of opportunity to address the emotional and behavioral Sikkema et al. Page 11
AIDS Behav . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
--- PAGE 12 ---
consequences of sexual trauma, and potentially impact HIV care engagement. The study 
demonstrated the feasibility of conducting a clinical trial, and the feasibility and 
acceptability of the individual intervention sessions, delivered with high rates of fidelity by a 
lay provider in mental health.
ImpACT, a brief coping intervention for HIV-infected women with a history of sexual abuse, 
was shown to reduce traumatic stress and increase motivation to adhere to treatment as ART 
was initiated. This preliminary effect was evident post intervention (3 months from 
baseline), with trends suggesting a potential impact at 6-month follow-up. Overall, all 
participants reported a reduction in PTSD symptoms, with ImpACT participants reporting a 
greater reduction in avoidance and arousal symptoms, with a trend for total symptom 
severity reduction. In further support of ImpACT’s potential to reduce PTSD, an exploratory 
analysis demonstrated that significantly more ImpACT participants reported a clinically 
significant reduction in overall PTSD symptoms, with nearly half reporting a reduction of 20 
points or more, moving most of those participants below the diagnostic threshold for PTSD. 
A similar pattern of results indicated increased motivation among ImpACT participants to 
adhere to ART post-intervention, with a trend suggesting a continued effect at the 6-month 
follow-up assessment. Lastly, while avoidant coping decreased among all study participants, 
ImpACT participants demonstrated an increased level of social/spiritual coping at the 6-
month follow assessment.
Taken together, these preliminary results suggest the potential for a brief coping intervention 
for HIV-infected women with extensive and ongoing traumatic experiences to reduce PTSD 
symptoms and improve motivation to adhere to HIV care. These preliminary effects are 
primarily evident post-intervention, with less clear support at the 6-month follow-up 
assessment. In addition, although the pilot study was not powered to evaluate psychological 
or clinical outcomes, levels of non-adherence across outcomes were similar between 
conditions at 6-month follow-up based on self-report and medical record abstraction of gaps 
between kept visits and viral load suppression. The overall challenges of adherence and viral 
suppression, with nearly 40% of our sample not suppressed at first viral load, suggest high 
levels of poor care engagement, supporting the need for trauma-informed interventions in 
this context.
Notably, while the individual sessions were considered feasible and acceptable, based on 
high levels of satisfaction with the content and interventionist, implementation of the group 
sessions met significant challenges and barriers. Although the study was designed to explore 
the additional benefit of group sessions, the low rate of attendance permitted the follow-up 
period between the 3- and 6-month assessments to serve as a form of no-intervention, 
maintenance period. The effectiveness of group intervention has been documented in other 
similar settings ( 64), and despite the acceptability of group sessions in our formative 
research, group sessions were unsuccessful in this study likely due to concerns of stigma and 
privacy, and difficulties with scheduling and transportation. Thus, although the exploratory 
outcomes suggest the potential for individual ImpACT sessions to effect change in the short-
term, an intervention of greater intensity and/or duration should be considered for this 
population in a full scale trial. This could include, for example, greater number of individual 
sessions that would replace group sessions, along with booster sessions over time. This Sikkema et al. Page 12
AIDS Behav . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
--- PAGE 13 ---
modification to ImpACT could provide opportunities for further coping skills development, 
utilizing practice and application to new stressors, including barriers to adherence and re-
emergence of avoidance and PTSD symptoms. This may be particularly necessary to 
demonstrate long-term effects on care engagement among HIV-infected women 
experiencing high levels of traumatic stress, and potentially ongoing sexual and physical 
violence.
Even within this syndemic context ( 65, 66), the ImpACT intervention and conduct of the 
trial were considered feasible across a variety of indicators. In collaboration with clinic 
providers, we were able to systematically refer and screen women for traumatic experiences. 
Based on our formative research findings ( 18), many women had not previously disclosed 
their sexually traumatic experiences, and few to none had disclosed in the health care 
setting. The prevalence of sexual abuse, intimate partner violence, and PTSD in our screened 
sample was higher than many HIV-positive studies ( 1), strongly supporting the need for a 
trauma-focused intervention in the context of differentiated care whereby scarce resources 
are allocated to individuals who may be most vulnerable and in need of support ( 67). Trial 
retention overall was similar to or better than prior adherence intervention studies in varied 
settings ( 68), with an impressive 80% retention at 6 months among women in this stressful 
context. Lastly, individual session intervention dosage among ImpACT participants was 
similar to other studies of trauma treatment ( 9, 10, 69).
Study Limitations
As a pilot feasibility study, there are limitations to the study design, primarily that the study 
was under-powered to evaluate effects, and the preliminary analysis should be considered 
exploratory and with the purpose of informing a large-scale trial. Although the preliminary 
findings support the potential for the ImpACT intervention to reduce traumatic stress and 
improve adherence motivation, all study participants improved over time on a number of 
psychological indicators. Possible explanations for the overall improvement over time 
include the following: 1) potential improvement in physical health due to ART initiation, 
with resulting decreases in psychological distress, 2) openly discussing experiences of 
sexual abuse and trauma in the context of the baseline study procedures, possibly for the first 
time, 3) supportive study staff, including repeated opportunities through assessments to 
acknowledge and report on various psychological symptoms and daily life stressors, 4) 
referrals for psychiatric and psychological services across study arms as needed, and 5) 
potential effect of adherence counseling sessions received as standard of care by all 
participants.
Although there were advantages of utilizing ART initiation as a window of opportunity for 
intervention, this timing also presented challenges and potential limitations in the study 
design. With the clinic-required adherence counseling sessions serving as the standard of 
care control condition, participants were typically screened, enrolled, completed baseline 
and randomized within days of learning they needed to initiate ART; for some, this was 
immediately after receiving an HIV diagnosis. This process potentially created a high level 
of stress for participants and could be one explanatory factor in the differential loss to 
follow-up among women experiencing intimate partner violence and those reporting Sikkema et al. Page 13
AIDS Behav . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
--- PAGE 14 ---
hazardous drinking upon enrollment in the trial. In contrast, study screening provided an 
opportunity for suicidality assessment and psychiatric referral for a number of participants 
not likely available through standard clinic procedures. Future research must consider 
alternative control conditions and timing of study entry, such that outcomes can remain 
focused on preventing non-adherence and maintaining care engagement, while also 
broadening the time period for study enrollment.
When considering the generalizability of these findings, demographic characteristics should 
be considered. Another limitation was the absence of direct observation of sessions (for 
example, through audio recordings), to assess intervention fidelity. In addition, the accuracy 
of self-reported adherence and medical record review cannot be confirmed, and future 
research should utilize viral load testing within the study protocol and consider biomarkers 
of medication to measure adherence, such as dried blood spots or hair samples.
Conclusions
ImpACT, in an exploratory clinical trial, was shown to reduce traumatic stress and increase 
ART adherence motivation among HIV-infected women with sexual abuse histories. A brief 
coping intervention, developed and culturally adapted based on an evidence-based approach 
to HIV and trauma, and delivered by a non-specialist in a public primary care clinic in Cape 
Town, was found to be feasible and acceptable for individual sessions. Future research 
should evaluate the ImpACT intervention, with modifications based on lessons learned in 
this pilot trial, in a full-scale RCT to assess its long-term effects on traumatic stress, coping 
and HIV care engagement. With South Africa currently implementing test-and treat 
guidelines ( 70, 71), but with continuing drop off across the HIV care cascade ( 72, 73), 
trauma-informed interventions are needed in this syndemic context to increase and maintain 
uptake of and adherence to ARV treatment.
Acknowledgments
This study was funded by a grant from NIMH (R34 MH102001). We also acknowledge support received from the 
Duke Center for AIDS Research (P30 AI064518), and the Duke Interdisciplinary Research Training Program in 
AIDS (T32 AI007392). We gratefully acknowledge the participants who contributed time and energy to this study.
References
1. Seedat S. Interventions to improve psychological functioning and health outcomes of HIV-infected 
individuals with a history of trauma or PTSD. Current HIV/AIDS Reports. 2012; 9(4):344–50. 
[PubMed: 23007792] 
2. Machtinger E, Wilson T, Haberer J, Weiss D. Psychological trauma and PTSD in HIV-positive 
women: A meta-analysis. AIDS and Behavior. 2012; 16(8):2091–100. [PubMed: 22249954] 
3. LeGrand S, Reif S, Sullivan K, Murray K, Barlow ML, Whetten K. A Review of Recent Literature 
on Trauma Among Individuals Living with HIV . Curr HIV/AIDS Rep. 2015; 12(4):397–405. 
[PubMed: 26419376] 
4. Whetten K, Shirey K, Pence BW, Yao J, Thielman N, Whetten R, et al. Trauma history and 
depression predict incomplete adherence to antiretroviral therapies in a low income country. PloS 
one. 2013; 8(10):e74771. [PubMed: 24124455] 
5. Aaron E, Criniti S, Bonacquisti A, Geller PA. Providing sensitive care for adult HIV-infected 
women with a history of childhood sexual abuse. The Journal of the Association of Nurses in AIDS 
Care: JANAC. 2013; 24(4):355–67. [PubMed: 23790278] Sikkema et al. Page 14
AIDS Behav . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
--- PAGE 15 ---
6. Hatcher AM, Smout EM, Turan JM, Christofides N, Stockl H. Intimate partner violence and 
engagement in HIV care and treatment among women: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Aids. 
2015; 29(16):2183–94. [PubMed: 26353027] 
7. Applebaum AJ, Bedoya CA, Hendriksen ES, Wilkinson JL, Safren SA, O’Cleirigh C. Future 
directions for interventions targeting PTSD in HIV-infected adults. The Journal of the Association 
of Nurses in AIDS Care: JANAC. 2015; 26(2):127–38. [PubMed: 25665885] 
8. McLean CP, Fitzgerald H. Treating Posttraumatic Stress Symptoms Among People Living with 
HIV: a Critical Review of Intervention Trials. Current psychiatry reports. 2016; 18(9):83. [PubMed: 
27439305] 
9. Pacella ML, Armelie A, Boarts J, Wagner G, Jones T, Feeny N, et al. The impact of prolonged 
exposure on PTSD symptoms and associated psychopathology in people living with HIV: A 
randomized test of concept. AIDS Behav. 2012; 16(5):1327–40. [PubMed: 22012149] 
10. Sikkema KJ, Ranby KW, Meade CS, Hansen NB, Wilson PA, Kochman A. Reductions in traumatic 
stress following a coping intervention were mediated by decreases in avoidant coping for people 
living with HIV/AIDS and childhood sexual abuse. J Consult Clin Psychol. 2013; 81(2):274–83. 
[PubMed: 23025248] 
11. Nemeroff CB, Bremner JD, Foa EB, Mayberg HS, North CS, Stein MB. Posttraumatic stress 
disorder: a state-of-the-science review. J Psychiatr Res. 2006; 40(1):1–21. [PubMed: 16242154] 
12. Folkman, S., Chesney, M., McKusick, L., Ironson, G., Johnson, D., Coates, T. Translating coping 
theory into an intervention. In: Eckenrode, J., editor. The Social Context of Coping. New York, 
NY: Plenum Press; 1991. p. 239-60.
13. UNAIDS. UNAIDS Data 2017. Geneva, Switzerland: Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/
AIDS; 2017. 
14. Jewkes R, Penn-Kekana L, Levin J, Ratsaka M, Schrieber M. Prevalence of emotional, physical 
and sexual abuse of women in three South African provinces. South African Medical Journal. 
2001; 91(5):421–8. [PubMed: 11455808] 
15. Yemeke TT, Sikkema KJ, Watt MH, Ciya N, Robertson C, Joska JA. Screening for Traumatic 
Experiences and Mental Health Distress Among Women in HIV Care in Cape Town, South Africa. 
Journal of interpersonal violence. 2017 0886260517718186. 
16. Whetten K, Reif S, Whetten R, Murphy-McMillan LK. Trauma, mental health, distrust, and stigma 
among HIV-positive persons: Implications for effective care. Psychosom Med. 2008; 70(5):531–8. 
[PubMed: 18541904] 
17. Blashill AJ, Perry N, Safren SA. Mental health: A focus on stress, coping, and mental illness as it 
relates to treatment retention, adherence, and other health outcomes. Current HIV/AIDS Reports. 
2011; 8(4):215–22. [PubMed: 21822626] 
18. Watt MH, Dennis AC, Choi KW, Ciya N, Joska JA, Robertson C, et al. Impact of Sexual Trauma 
on HIV Care Engagement: Perspectives of Female Patients with Trauma Histories in Cape Town, 
South Africa. AIDS Behav. 2017; 21(11):3209–18. [PubMed: 27866288] 
19. McIntosh R, Rosselli M. Stress and coping in women living with HIV: A meta-analytic review. 
AIDS and Behavior. 2012; 16(8):2144–59. [PubMed: 22434282] 
20. Keuroghlian AS, Kamen CS, Neri E, Lee S, Liu R, Gore-Felton C. Trauma, dissociation, and 
antiretroviral adherence among persons living with HIV/AIDS. Journal of Psychiatric Research. 
2011; 45(7):942–8. [PubMed: 21636097] 
21. Dallam, S. Where does it hurt? How victimization impacts presentation and outcomes in primary 
care. In: Banyard, VL.Edwards, VJ., Kendall-Tackett, K., editors. Trauma and physical health: 
Understanding the effects of extreme stress and of psychological harm. London and New York: 
Routledge; 2009. p. 134-62.
22. Pence BW, Mugavero MJ, Carter TJ, Leserman J, Thielman NM, Raper JL, et al. Childhood 
trauma and health outcomes in HIV-infected patients: An exploration of causal pathways. Journal 
of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes. 2012; 59(4):409–16. [PubMed: 22107822] 
23. Brief DJ, Bollinger AR, Vielhauer MJ, Berger-Greenstein JA, Morgan EE, Brady SM, et al. 
Understanding the interface of HIV , trauma, post-traumatic stress disorder, and substance use and 
its implications for health outcomes. AIDS Care. 2004; 16(Suppl 1):S97–120. [PubMed: 
15736824] Sikkema et al. Page 15
AIDS Behav . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
--- PAGE 16 ---
24. Kessler RC, Berglund P, Demler O, Jin R, Merikangas KR, Walters EE. Lifetime prevalence and 
age-of-onset distributions of DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. 
Archives of General Psychiatry. 2005; 62(6):593–602. [PubMed: 15939837] 
25. Seedat S, Stein DJ, Carey PD. Post-traumatic stress disorder in women: Epidemiological and 
treatment issues. CNS Drugs. 2005; 19(5):411–27. [PubMed: 15907152] 
26. Ironson G, O’Cleirigh C, Fletcher MA, Laurenceau JP, Balbin E, Klimas N, et al. Psychosocial 
factors predict CD4 and viral load change in men and women with human immunodeficiency virus 
in the era of highly active antiretroviral treatment. Psychosom Med. 2005; 67(6):1013–21. 
[PubMed: 16314608] 
27. Reilly KH, Clark RA, Schmidt N, Benight CC, Kissinger P. The effect of post-traumatic stress 
disorder on HIV disease progression following hurricane Katrina. AIDS Care. 2009; 21(10):1298–
305. [PubMed: 20024706] 
28. Schafer KR, Brant J, Gupta S, Thorpe J, Winstead-Derlega C, Pinkerton R, et al. Intimate partner 
violence: a predictor of worse HIV outcomes and engagement in care. AIDS Patient Care STDS. 
2012; 26(6):356–65. [PubMed: 22612519] 
29. Leserman J, Pence B, Whetten K, Mugavero M, Thielman N, Swartz M, et al. Relation of lifetime 
trauma and depressive symptoms to mortality in HIV . American Journal of Psychiatry. 2007; 
164(11):1707–13. [PubMed: 17974936] 
30. Campbell JC, Baty ML, Ghandour RM, Stockman JK, Francisco L, Wagman J. The intersection of 
intimate partner violence against women and HIV/AIDS: a review. International journal of injury 
control and safety promotion. 2008; 15(4):221–31. [PubMed: 19051085] 
31. Brezing C, Ferrara M, Freudenreich O. The syndemic illness of HIV and trauma: implications for a 
trauma-informed model of care. Psychosomatics. 2015; 56(2):107–18. [PubMed: 25597836] 
32. Machtinger EL, Cuca YP, Khanna N, Rose CD, Kimberg LS. From treatment to healing: the 
promise of trauma-informed primary care. Womens Health Issues. 2015; 25(3):193–7. [PubMed: 
25965151] 
33. Sales JM, Swartzendruber A, Phillips AL. Trauma-Informed HIV Prevention and Treatment. Curr 
HIV/AIDS Rep. 2016; 13(6):374–82. [PubMed: 27704251] 
34. Onu C, Ongeri L, Bukusi E, Cohen CR, Neylan TC, Oyaro P, et al. Interpersonal psychotherapy for 
depression and posttraumatic stress disorder among HIV-positive women in Kisumu, Kenya: study 
protocol for a randomized controlled trial. Trials. 2016; 17:64. [PubMed: 26841875] 
35. Opiyo E, Ongeri L, Rota G, Verdeli H, Neylan T, Meffert S. Collaborative Interpersonal 
Psychotherapy for HIV-Positive Women in Kenya: A Case Study From the Mental Health, HIV 
and Domestic Violence (MIND) Study. Journal of clinical psychology. 2016; 72(8):779–83. 
[PubMed: 27463639] 
36. Patel V . The future of psychiatry in low- and middle-income countries. Psychological Medicine. 
2009; 39(11):1759–62. [PubMed: 20162837] 
37. Petersen I, Lund C, Stein DJ. Optimizing mental health services in low-income and middle-income 
countries. Current Opinion in Psychiatry. 2011; 24(4):318–23. DOI: 10.1097/YCO.
0b013e3283477afb [PubMed: 21546837] 
38. Statistics South Africa. South African National Census of 2011. Pretoria, South Africa: 
Government of South Africa; 2011. 
39. Department of Health. National Consolidated Guidelines for the Prevention of Mother-to-Child 
Transmission of HIV (PMTCT) and the Management of HIV in Children, Adolsecents and Adults. 
Pretoria, South Africa: 2015. 
40. World Health Organization. Composite international diagnostic interview (CIDI), Version 1.0. 
Geneva: WHO; 1990. 
41. Bernstein DP, Stein JA, Newcomb MD, Walker E, Pogge D, Ahluvalia T, et al. Development and 
validation of a brief screening version of the Childhood Trauma Questionnaire. Child Abuse and 
Neglect. 2003; 27(2):169–90. [PubMed: 12615092] 
42. Lecrubier Y , Sheehan D, Weiller E, Amorim P, Bonora I, Harnett Sheehan K, et al. The Mini 
International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI). A short diagnostic structured interview: 
reliability and validity according to the CIDI. European Psychiatry. 1997; 12(5):224–31.Sikkema et al. Page 16
AIDS Behav . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
--- PAGE 17 ---
43. Browne RH. On the use of a pilot sample for sample size determination. Statistics in medicine. 
1995; 14(17):1933–40. [PubMed: 8532986] 
44. Eldridge SM, Chan CL, Campbell MJ, Bond CM, Hopewell S, Thabane L, et al. CONSORT 2010 
statement: extension to randomised pilot and feasibility trials. BMJ (Clinical research ed). 2016; 
355:i5239.
45. Sikkema KJ, Wilson PA, Hansen NB, Kochman A, Neufeld S, Ghebremichael MS, et al. Effects of 
a coping intervention on transmission risk behavior among people living with HIV/AIDS and a 
history of childhood sexual abuse. Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes. 2008; 
47(4):506–13. [PubMed: 18176319] 
46. Meade CS, Drabkin AS, Hansen NB, Wilson PA, Kochman A, Sikkema KJ. Reductions in alcohol 
and cocaine use following a group coping intervention for HIV-positive adults with childhood 
sexual abuse histories. Addiction. 2010; 105(11):1942–51. [PubMed: 20840176] 
47. Sikkema, KJ., Joska, JA., Choi, KW., Robertson, C., Ciya, N., Knettel, BA., et al. ImpACT: 
Improving AIDS Care After Trauma - Intervention Manual. Duke University and University of 
Cape Town; 2017. 
48. Bush K, Kivlahan DR, McDonell MB, Fihn SD, Bradley KA. The AUDIT alcohol consumption 
questions (AUDIT-C): an effective brief screening test for problem drinking. Ambulatory Care 
Quality Improvement Project (ACQUIP). Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test. Archives of 
internal medicine. 1998; 158(16):1789–95. [PubMed: 9738608] 
49. Kotze M, Visser M, Makin J, Sikkema K, Forsyth B. Psychosocial variables associated with coping 
of HIV-positive women diagnosed during pregnancy. AIDS Behav. 2013; 17(2):498–507. 
[PubMed: 23196861] 
50. Straus MA, Hamby SL, Boney-McCoy S, Sugarman DB. The revised Conflict Tactics Scales 
(CTS2): Development and preliminary psychometric data. Journal of Family Issues. 1996; 17(3):
283–316.
51. Blevins CA, Weathers FW, Davis MT, Witte TK, Domino JL. The Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 
Checklist for DSM-5 (PCL-5): Development and Initial Psychometric Evaluation. J Trauma Stress. 
2015; 28(6):489–98. [PubMed: 26606250] 
52. Namir S, Wolcott DL, Fawzey FI, Alumbaugh MJ. Coping with AIDS: Psychological and health 
implications. Journal of Applied Social Psychology. 1987; 17(3):309–28.
53. Kotze M, Visser M, Makin J, Sikkema K, Forsyth B. The coping strategies used over a two-year 
period by HIV-positive women who had been diagnosed during pregnancy. AIDS Care. 2013; 
25(6):695–701. [PubMed: 23442202] 
54. Olley BO, Zeier MD, Seedat S, Stein DJ. Post-traumatic stress disorder among recently diagnosed 
patients with HIV/AIDS in South Africa. AIDS Care. 2005; 17(5):550–7. [PubMed: 16036241] 
55. Carver CS. You want to measure coping but your protocol’s too long: Consider the brief COPE. 
International Journal of Behavioral Medicine. 1997; 4(1):92–100. [PubMed: 16250744] 
56. Hansen NB, Harrison B, Fambro S, Bodnar S, Heckman TG, Sikkema KJ. The structure of coping 
among older adults living with HIV/AIDS and depressive symptoms. Journal of Health 
Psychology. 2013; 18(2):198–211. [PubMed: 22453164] 
57. Folkman, S., Lazarus, RS. Manual for the Ways of Coping Questionnaire: Research Edition. Palo 
Alto, CA: Consulting Psychological Press; 1988. 
58. The LifeWindows Project Team. The LifeWindows Information Motivation Behavioral Skills ART 
Adherence Questionnaire (LW-IMB-AAQ). Center for Health, Intervention, and Prevention. 
University of Connecticut; 2006. 
59. Chesney MA, Ickovics JR, Chambers DB, Gifford AL, Neidig J, Zwickl B, et al. Self-reported 
adherence to antiretroviral medications among participants in HIV clinical trials: the AACTG 
adherence instruments. Patient Care Committee & Adherence Working Group of the Outcomes 
Committee of the Adult AIDS Clinical Trials Group (AACTG). AIDS Care. 2000; 12(3):255–66. 
[PubMed: 10928201] 
60. Mugavero MJ, Westfall AO, Zinski A, Davila J, Drainoni ML, Gardner LI, et al. Measuring 
retention in HIV care: The elusive gold standard. Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency 
Syndromes. 2012; 61(5):574–80. [PubMed: 23011397] Sikkema et al. Page 17
AIDS Behav . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
--- PAGE 18 ---
61. World Health Organization. Consolidated guidelines on person-centred HIV patient monitoring and 
case surveillance. Geneva: WHO; 2017. 
62. Harris PA, Taylor R, Thielke R, Payne J, Gonzalez N, Conde JG. Research electronic data capture 
(REDCap)--a metadata-driven methodology and workflow process for providing translational 
research informatics support. Journal of biomedical informatics. 2009; 42(2):377–81. [PubMed: 
18929686] 
63. Weathers, FW., Litz, BT., Keane, TM., Palmieri, PA., Marx, BP., Schnurr, PP. The PTSD Checklist 
for DSM-5  (PCL-5) 2013 [Scale. National Center for PTSD; at www.ptsd.va.gov .]
64. Bass JK, Annan J, McIvor Murray S, Kaysen D, Griffiths S, Cetinoglu T, et al. Controlled trial of 
psychotherapy for Congolese survivors of sexual violence. The New England journal of medicine. 
2013; 368(23):2182–91. [PubMed: 23738545] 
65. Singer M, Bulled N, Ostrach B, Mendenhall E. Syndemics and the biosocial conception of health. 
Lancet. 2017; 389(10072):941–50. [PubMed: 28271845] 
66. Meyer JP, Springer SA, Altice FL. Substance abuse, violence, and HIV in women: a literature 
review of the syndemic. Journal of women’s health (2002). 2011; 20(7):991–1006.
67. Grimsrud A, Bygrave H, Doherty M, Ehrenkranz P, Ellman T, Ferris R, et al. Reimagining HIV 
service delivery: the role of differentiated care from prevention to suppression. J Int AIDS Soc. 
2016; 19(1):21484. [PubMed: 27914186] 
68. Rueda S, Park-Wyllie LY , Bayoumi A, Tynan A-M, Antoniou T, Rourke S, et al. Patient support 
and education for promoting adherence to highly active antiretroviral therapy for HIV/AIDS. 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2006; (3)
69. Hembree EA, Foa EB, Dorfan NM, Street GP, Kowalski J, Tu X. Do patients drop out prematurely 
from exposure therapy for PTSD? J Trauma Stress. 2003; 16(6):555–62. [PubMed: 14690352] 
70. World Health Organization. Consolidated guidelines on the use of antiretroviral drugs for treating 
and preventing HIV infection. Geneva: WHO; 2016. 
71. Department of Health. Minister Aaron Motsoaledi: Health Dept Budget V ote 2016/17. 2016. 
72. UNAIDS. Prevention Gap Report. Geneva, Switzerland: Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/
AIDS; 2016. 
73. Takuva S, Brown AE, Pillay Y , Delpech V , Puren AJ. The continuum of HIV care in South Africa: 
implications for achieving the second and third UNAIDS 90-90-90 targets. Aids. 2017; 31(4):545–
52. [PubMed: 28121668] Sikkema et al. Page 18
AIDS Behav . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
--- PAGE 19 ---
Figure 1. 
CONSORT Flow Diagram of the study participants through the trial.
Note: a Of the 141 participants referred to the study, 8 were reinitiating ART after defaulting 
treatment. 4 did not meet eligibility criteria (no sexual trauma) and 1 did not appear for 
baseline. 3 re-initiators were enrolled in the trial (2 randomized to ImpACT and 1 to SoC).Sikkema et al. Page 19
AIDS Behav . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
--- PAGE 20 ---
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptSikkema et al. Page 20
Table 1
Study sample characteristics
Study Condition
Total sample (n=64)
n (%)SoC (n=32)
n (%)ImpACT (n=32)
n (%)
Demographic Characteristics
Age, Mean (SD) 29.0 (8.4) 29.2 (6.6) 29.1 (7.5)
Education
 Some high school or less 24 (75.0) 26 (81.3) 50 (78.1)
 Completed high school 5 (15.6) 5 (15.6) 10 (15.6)
 Some university or more 3 (9.4) 1 (3.1) 4 (6.3)
Current Employment Status
 Currently working 6 (18.7) 10 (31.2) 16 (25.0)
 Casual/sometimes working 2 (6.3) 2 (6.3) 4 (6.3)
 Not working 24 (75.0) 20 (62.5) 44 (68.7)
Relationship status
 Single 2 (6.3) 2 (6.3) 4 (6.3)
 In a relationship, not living together 17 (53.1) 21 (65.6) 38 (59.4)
 In a relationship, living together 5 (15.6) 5 (15.6) 10 (15.6)
 Married 4 (12.5) 4 (12.5) 8 (12.5)
 Separated/Divorced 4 (12.5) 0 (0) 4 (6.3)
Sexual Abuse History
Sexual abuse in childhood 6 (18.8) 6 (18.8) 12 (18.8)
Sexual abuse in adolescence 17 (53.1) 14 (43.8) 31 (48.4)
Sexual abuse in adulthood 25 (78.1) 24 (75.0) 49 (76.6)
Recent (last 3 months) sexual abuse 12 (37.5) 14 (43.8) 26 (40.6)
Physical Intimate Partner Violence
Ever experienced physical IPV 24 (75.0) 30 (93.8) 54 (84.4)
Recent (last 3 months) physical IPV 6 (18.8) 9 (28.1) 15 (23.4)
Other Traumatic Events
Lifetime exposure to traumatic event 28 (87.5) 31 (96.9) 59 (92.2)
Adulthood exposure to traumatic event 27 (84.4) 29 (90.6) 56 (87.5)
Hazardous Drinking 13 (40.6) 15 (46.9) 28 (43.8)
HIV-Related Characteristics
Recent HIV Diagnosis (<3 months) 19 (59.4) 18 (56.3) 37 (57.8)
CD4 count, (Mean, SD) 286.9 (115.6) 348.8 (163.5) 317.9 (143.9)
Initiated ART during study period 28 (87.5) 29 (90.6) 57 (89.1)
Note: No significant differences were found between the two conditions.
AIDS Behav . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 01.
--- PAGE 21 ---
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptSikkema et al. Page 21Table 2
Intervention effects on traumatic stress, coping, and motivation to adhere to ART
Baseline (n=64) 3-Month Follow-up (n=45) Baseline to 3-Month Overall Effect 6-Month Follow-up (n=51) Baseline to 6-Month Overall Effect
F Values: F Values:
Mean (SE) Mean (SE) Time Mean (SE) Time
Condition*Time Condition*Time
PCL – Total Symptom Severity Score
 ImpACT 43.28 (3.88)* 25.79 (5.40) 15.84** 28.61 (5.04) 7.54**
 SoC 30.72 (3.58) 23.04 (3.60) 3.15† 22.50 (3.47) 0.90
PCL – Cluster B
 ImpACT 10.03 (1.20) 6.42 (1.52) 10.58** 7.30 (1.30) 4.42*
 SoC 7.72 (1.12) 5.27 (1.26) 1.15 5.82 (1.02) 0.22
PCL – Cluster C
 ImpACT 4.53 (0.52)* 2.21 (0.63) 17.67** 2.96 (0.60) 5.09**
 SoC 3.03 (0.46) 2.23 (0.39) 5.05* 2.71 (0.47) 1.37
PCL – Cluster D
 ImpACT 15.84 (1.45)* 9.68 (2.31) 12.63** 10.43 (1.93) 8.19**
 SoC 11.66 (1.37) 7.54 (1.34) 0.58 7.21 (1.43) 0.21
PCL – Cluster E
 ImpACT 12.88 (1.28)** 7.47 (1.36) 8.01** 7.91 (1.54) 5.32**
 SoC 8.31 (1.13) 8.00 (1.21) 6.78* 6.75 (1.10) 2.55†
Avoidant Coping
 ImpACT 2.45 (0.11) 2.10 (0.12) 14.24** 2.17 (0.13) 12.42**
 SoC 2.40 (0.08) 2.13 (0.07) 0.15 1.99 (0.09) 0.69
Spiritual/Social Coping
 ImpACT 2.54 (0.10) 2.89 (0.11) 3.93† 2.90 (0.10)* 2.47†
 SoC 2.62 (0.11) 2.66 (0.11) 2.58 2.58 (0.10) 2.95†
AIDS Behav . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 01.
--- PAGE 22 ---
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptSikkema et al. Page 22Baseline (n=64) 3-Month Follow-up (n=45) Baseline to 3-Month Overall Effect 6-Month Follow-up (n=51) Baseline to 6-Month Overall Effect
F Values: F Values:
Mean (SE) Mean (SE) Time Mean (SE) Time
Condition*Time Condition*Time
Motivation to Adhere
 ImpACT 19.00 (1.27) 23.84 (1.46) 11.24** 21.63 (1.60) 5.74**
 SoC 20.88 (1.13) 22.40 (1.27) 4.27* 21.33 (1.19) 2.40†
Note: Between-group differences within each time point denoted at † p < .10, * p < .05, and ** p < .01, respectively
AIDS Behav . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 01.
