A cluster randomized controlled trial of a telephone-based parent
intervention to increase preschoolers’ fruit and vegetable
consumption1–3
Rebecca Wyse, Luke Wolfenden, Elizabeth Campbell, Karen J Campbell, John Wiggers, Leah Brennan, Amanda Fletcher,
Jenny Bowman, and Todd R Heard
ABSTRACT
Background: Inadequate fruit and vegetable consumption is asso-
ciated with increased chronic disease risk and represents a consider-
able global health burden. Despite evidence that dietary habits
track from early childhood, there are few published trials of in-
terventions attempting to increase preschoolers’ fruit and vegetable
consumption.
Objective: The Healthy Habits trial aimed to assess the efﬁcacy of
a telephone-based intervention for parents to increase the fruit and
vegetable consumption in their 3–5-y-old children.
Design: A cluster randomized controlled trial was conducted in-
volving 394 parents of children aged 3–5 y recruited through local
preschools. Parents allocated to the intervention received printed
resources plus four 30-min telephone calls targeting aspects of the
home food environment associated with children’s fruit and vege-
table consumption. Parents allocated to the control group received
generic printed nutrition information. Children’s fruit and vegetable
consumption was assessed by using the Fruit and Vegetable Sub-
scale of the Children’s Dietary Questionnaire, which was adminis-
tered via telephone interview at baseline and 2 and 6 mo later.
Results: Analysis of all available data showed that children’s fruit
and vegetable scores were signiﬁcantly higher in the intervention
group than in the control group at 2 mo (P , 0.001) and at 6 mo
(P = 0.021). Sensitivity analysis using baseline observation carried
forward showed an intervention effect at 2 mo (P = 0.008) but not
at 6 mo (P = 0.069).
Conclusions: Telephone-delivered parent interventions may be an
effective way of increasing children’s fruit and vegetable consump-
tion in the short term. Further investigation to determine whether
the intervention effect is maintained in the longer term is recom-
mended. This trial was registered at http://www.anzctr.org.au as
ACTRN12609000820202.
Am J Clin Nutr 2012;96:102–10.
INTRODUCTION
Inadequate fruit and vegetable consumption increases chronic
disease risk (1–3) and represents a considerable health burden
worldwide (4). Evidence suggests that childhood dietary patterns
track into adulthood (5), and high fruit and vegetable con-
sumption in childhood has been associated with a lower risk of
adulthood stroke and cancer (6, 7). Because early childhood is
important in the development of dietary habits (8), interventions
to promote young children’s fruit and vegetable intakes may help
to establish dietary habits that decrease chronic disease risk in
adulthood.
Systematic reviews have identiﬁed a dearth of quality in-
tervention studies to increase fruit and vegetable consumption in
preschoolers (children aged 3–5 y) (9, 10). Most of the published
trials have investigated multicomponent interventions conducted
in the preschool setting and have predominantly targeted the
policies and practices within the preschool environment (11–14).
Interventions targeting the home environment, however, may be
particularly effective (9) given that social and physical charac-
teristics of the home environment are among the strongest cor-
relates of children’s fruit and vegetable consumption (15, 16).
Despite this, to our knowledge, only one published intervention
trial has targeted the home food environment of preschoolers. In
this randomized controlled trial of 1306 disadvantaged, rural-
dwelling participants in the United States, an intervention
consisting of 4 home visits, resources, and tailored newsletters
had no overall effect on children’s fruit and vegetable intakes at
6–11 mo of follow-up (17).
Given evidence of the efﬁcacy of telephone-delivered in-
terventions in improving adult dietary behaviors (18, 19), tele-
phone interventions delivered to parents and targeting the home
environment may represent an effective primary prevention
strategy to enhance children’s fruit and vegetable intake. As
such, we recently conducted a pre-post pilot trial and reported
a signiﬁcant postintervention increase in preschoolers’ fruit and
1 From the School of Medicine and Public Health (RW, LW, JW, AF, and
TRH) and the School of Psychology (JB), University of Newcastle, New-
castle, Australia; Hunter New England Population Health, Newcastle, Aus-
tralia (EC, JW, and TRH); the Centre for Physical Activity & Nutrition
Research, School of Exercise & Nutrition Sciences, Deakin University, Mel-
bourne, Australia (KJC); the Centre for Obesity Research and Education,
Monash University, Melbourne, Australia (LB); and the Hunter Medical
Research Institute, Newcastle, Australia (RW, LW, EC, JW, AF, and TRH).
2 Supported by the Cancer Institute New South Wales (grant 08/ECF/1-
18). Infrastructure support was provided by the Hunter Medical Research
Institute, and in-kind support was provided by Hunter New England Popu-
lation Health.
3 Address correspondence and reprint requests to R Wyse, Hunter New
England Population Health, Locked Bag 10, Wallsend, NSW 2287, Australia.
E-mail: rebecca.wyse@hnehealth.nsw.gov.au.
Received November 10, 2011. Accepted for publication April 2, 2012.
First published online May 23, 2012; doi: 10.3945/ajcn.111.030585.
102
Am J Clin Nutr 2012;96:102–10. Printed in USA.  2012 American Society for Nutrition
vegetable consumption immediately after a 4-contact, telephone-
based intervention (20). On the basis of the pilot ﬁndings and the
broader telephone and health behavior literature (19), we sought
to test the longer-term efﬁcacy of the intervention in an appro-
priately powered randomized controlled trial.
The primary aim of the current study was to assess the efﬁcacy
of a telephone-based intervention for parents to increase the fruit
and vegetable consumption of their 3–5-y-old children. It was
hypothesized that the change in children’s fruit and vegetable
scores from baseline to 2 mo and from baseline to 6 mo would be
greater in the intervention children than in the control children.
Given that dietary patterns that include a high intake of fruit and
vegetables have been associated with higher food costs (21), as an
assessment of a possible adverse effect, an additional aim was to
determine whether intervention participation was associated with
an increase in reported weekly household food expenditure.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS
Design overview
The Healthy Habits trial used a cluster randomized controlled
design and was prospectively registered with the Australian New
Zealand Clinical Trials Registry. All trial outcomes and subgroup
analyses reported in this article were prespeciﬁed. The research
was approved by the Human Research Ethics Committees of the
University of Newcastle (H-2008-0410) and the Hunter New
England Area Health Service (08/10/15/5.09). This article reports
the 2- and 6-mo primary trial outcomes collected via telephone
interviews with the parents. The methods used to conduct this trial
were published elsewhere (22) and are described brieﬂy below.
Participants
Parents were recruited through preschools within 4 Local
Government Areas of the Hunter region of New South Wales,
Australia, by using strategies found to be effective in increasing
participation in child health research (23). All nongovernment
preschools were eligible to participate if they did not provide
meals to children, did not exclusively cater for children with
special needs, or had not been involved in healthy eating studies
within the preceding 6 mo. At preschools where the manager
consented to participate, a research assistant, blind to preschool
allocation, distributed study information and consent forms to
parents as they dropped off or picked up their child. The consent
form contained questions about the child’s usual fruit and veg-
etable consumption and the child’s sex, age, and residential postal
code. To assess bias due to selective nonparticipation, all parents
were asked to complete these details on the consent form, even if
they chose not to consent to participate in the study. Parents were
eligible to participate if they had a 3–5-y-old child who resided
with them for 4 d/wk, were responsible for providing food to
their child at least half of the time, had a child with no dietary
requirements that would make Australian fruit and vegetable
intake recommendations unsuitable, and were literate in English.
Recruitment took place from February to August 2010.
Randomization and allocation
After the commencement of parent recruitment, a statistician
not associated with the project used a random number function in
Microsoft Excel to allocate preschools to the intervention or
control group. Randomization was carried out at the level of the
preschool to reduce potential contamination from parents at the
same preschool sharing intervention information or resources.
Randomization of preschools was stratiﬁed by socioeconomic
status based on the decile of disadvantage classiﬁcation of the
postal code area in which the preschool was located (24). Pre-
schools were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio (intervention:
control) in randomly sequenced blocks of between 2 and 6
preschools. Parents were informed of group allocation via a letter
after baseline data collection.
Experimental group
Intervention
Parents allocated to the intervention group received 4 tele-
phone calls over a period of 4 wk. Intervention participants were
also mailed a series of instructional resources, including a
guidebook, a meal planner, cookbooks, and a water bottle for all
family members. A complete description of the intervention is
provided in the trial protocol (22). Telephone-delivered in-
terventions of a similar intensity were previously shown to be
effective at increasing adult health behaviors (25, 26). An
overview of the intervention content and structure is provided in
Table 1.
The intervention assumes that children’s fruit and vegetable
consumption stems from the complex interaction between per-
sonal, cultural, and environmental factors and draws on socio-
ecologic theory (28). Speciﬁcally, the intervention used the
conceptual model of family-based intervention proposed by
Golan and Weizman (29) in the treatment and prevention of
childhood obesity. This model focuses on introducing new fa-
milial norms associated with healthy eating. This is achieved
through making changes within the home food environment,
providing positive parental role-modeling, and increasing knowl-
edge and skills related to parenting and nutrition (29). The in-
tervention used a range of behavior-change techniques as
classiﬁed in the taxonomy proposed by Abraham and Michie (30)
to encourage parents to make such changes (Table 1). These
techniques included goal setting, behavioral self-monitoring,
intention formation, use of prompts or cues, and review of be-
havioral goals (30). The calls focused on increasing fruit and
vegetable availability and accessibility in the home, increasing
parental role-modeling of fruit and vegetable consumption, and
enhancing supportive food routines around the home, such as
eating dinner as a family without the television on. The calls were
scripted and delivered by using computer-assisted telephone
interview (CATI)4 (31) software. Participants had to complete
each call before progressing to the next, ie, no intervention calls
could be skipped. All participants received information relating
to each intervention content area (Table 1). Within content areas,
however, the information provided was tailored based on assess-
ments made during baseline data collection or earlier intervention
calls regarding the participant’s home food environment, par-
enting, or dietary practices. For example, to facilitate role-
modeling, parents already regularly consuming fruit and vegetables
4 Abbreviations used: CATI, computer-assisted telephone interview; F&V,
Fruit and Vegetable Subscale; GEE, generalized estimating equation.
TELEPHONE INTERVENTION FOR PRESCHOOL PARENTS
103
TABLE 1
Intervention content, strategies, and structure1
Key theme
Content
Behavior change
technique
Application of behavior
change technique
Week 1: Availability and accessibility
d Dietary recommendations and serving sizes
d Children’s food diary
d Ways to provide fruit and vegetables
throughout the day
d Prompt self-monitoring
of behavior
d Parents are asked to monitor their children’s
intake of fruit and vegetables over 3 d
d Setting goals
d Prompt speciﬁc goal-setting
d Parents are encouraged to set a program goal
Week 2: Availability and accessibility,
supportive family eating routines
d Changing the family routine
d Availability and accessibility of foods
in the home
d Mealtime practices
d Meal planning
d Review of goals
d Prompt intention formation
d Provide general encouragement
d Teach to use prompts or cues
d Prompt review of behavioral goals
d Parents decide which activities they will attempt
in the coming week
d Interviewers provide positive feedback about any
helpful practices occurring in the home
d Parents learn the HELPS acronym, ie, try to
eat when Hungry, not attempting anything else
at the same time (focus on Eating), at an
appropriate Location to eat, from a Plate,
and while Sitting
d Parents review the goals they set during the
previous calls and evaluate their progress
Week 3: Parental role-modeling, supportive
family eating routines
d The Ps and Cs division of feeding
responsibility
d Mealtime strategies to encourage vegetable
consumption
d Role-modeling of fruit and vegetable
consumption
d Teach to use prompts or cues
d Prompt intention formation
d Provide general encouragement
d Prompt identiﬁcation as a role model
d Parents learn the Ps and Cs: parents are
encouraged to Plan, Prepare, and Provide.
Children are encouraged to Choose (whether,
what, and how much to eat) (27)
d Parents decide which activities they will attempt
in the coming week
d Interviewers provide positive feedback about any
helpful practices occurring in the home
d Parents are provided information about their
importance in role-modeling fruit and vegetable
consumption; their consumption is compared with
national nutrition recommendations, and tailored
feedback is provided
Week 4: Availability and accessibility,
parental role-modeling, supportive family
eating routines
d Review of weeks 1 to 3
d Planning for the future and dealing
with difﬁcult situations
d Review of goals
d Provide general encouragement
d Prompt barrier identiﬁcation
d Prompt review of behavioral goals
d Interviewers provide positive feedback about any
helpful practices occurring in the home
d Parents are encouraged to identify barriers that
will prevent them from implementing what they have
learned and to generate solutions
d Parents review their program goal, evaluate
their progress, and identify how they can
maintain the change
1 From Wyse et al (22). Cs, responsibilities of the “children,” which are to “choose whether or not to eat,” “choose what to eat from a variety of healthy options,” and “choose how much to eat at scheduled
meal and snack times”; Ps, responsibilities of the “parents”—to “plan,” “prepare,” and “provide.”
104
WYSE ET AL
in front of their children (based on baseline assessment) were
congratulated and encouraged to maintain this behavior. Par-
ents not routinely modeling consumption of these foods,
however, were given the opportunity to set a goal to work toward
achieving this over the next week and were provided with
strategies to assist with goal attainment. Parents could be offered
between 1 and 4 activities to undertake between calls. Data from
the pilot trial suggest that parents actively engaged in these tasks
(20).
The scripts and the resources were extensively pretested
and piloted (20). Five experienced health interviewers with no
formal qualiﬁcations in nutrition or psychology and not blind to
participant allocation delivered the scripted telephone support.
Interventionists received 2 d of training in script delivery and
associated nutrition and parenting issues from an accredited
practicing dietitian, a psychologist specializing in parenting,
and health-promotion practitioners and were then required to
complete an additional 10 h of delivery practice. For the duration
of the intervention delivery period (April to December 2010),
interventionists participated in biweekly group supervision
sessions with a psychologist specializing in parenting to ensure
that any arising issues were dealt with in an appropriate and
standardized manner. Members of the research team moni-
tored each interventionist multiple times throughout the inter-
vention delivery period to assess adherence to the intervention
protocol.
Control
Parents allocated to the control group were mailed the Aus-
tralian Guide to Healthy Eating—a 22-page booklet outlining
the dietary guidelines and ways to meet them (32). They re-
ceived no further contact until the 2-mo follow-up data collec-
tion call.
Data collection and blinding
All data collection occurred via CATI by using trained tele-
phone interviewers. Participants could be contacted on landlines
or mobile numbers and were called ;1 wk after recruitment to
complete the baseline survey and then ;2 and 6 mo later for
follow-up data collection. At each time point, data collectors
attempted to contact participants for a 2-mo period, and, if the
call could not be completed, contact was attempted again at the
subsequent follow-up point. The baseline survey was conducted
from April to October 2010. Parents were instructed to complete
the baseline and follow-up surveys with respect to their pre-
school-aged child. If they had more than one child aged 3–5 y,
they were instructed to select the child who would have the next
birthday. Data collectors received 4 h of training in script de-
livery and during the data-collection periods were regularly
monitored by members of the study team to ensure standardized
survey delivery across data collectors. Data collectors were
blind to group allocation. To assess whether blinding was
maintained, after collection of follow-up trial outcomes, the
CATI system prompted the data collector to nominate the group
to which they thought the participant had been allocated. The
proportion of times data collectors correctly identiﬁed group
allocation at each time point was calculated.
Measures
Participant characteristics
Information regarding parent and child characteristics was
collected from the consent form and the baseline CATI. The
consent form included questions about child sex, age, and postal
code and 2 items that assessed the child’s usual daily intake of
fruit and vegetable servings. These items were included to allow
for comparison between those who did and did not consent to
study participation. During the CATI, participants were asked
their age, their sex, their annual household income, their highest
level of education, whether they identiﬁed as Aboriginal and/or
Torres Strait Islander, the number of children in their household,
and the number of servings of fruit and vegetables they consumed
daily. Participants also reported their child’s date of birth and sex
and whether their child identiﬁed as Aboriginal and/or Torres
Strait Islander.
Children’s fruit and vegetable intake
Children’s fruit and vegetable intake was the primary trial
outcome and was assessed at baseline and at the 2- and 6-mo
follow-ups by using the Fruit and Vegetable Subscale (F&V) of the
Children’s Dietary Questionnaire. The subscale has been estab-
lished as reliable (test-retest intraclass correlation coefﬁcient =
0.75) in samples of 39 children aged 4–5 y and 92 children aged
5–16 y and was established as valid as compared with a 7-d
checklist (Spearman correlation coefﬁcient = 0.58) in samples of
126 children aged 5–6 y and 132 children aged 5–10 y (33). A
preliminary assessment using data from a sample of 126 children
aged 5–10 y indicated that the subscale demonstrated the ability to
detect change in the hypothesized direction (Wilcoxon’s signed
rank test, P , 0.001) (33).
The scale requires parents to report the frequency and variety
of fruit and vegetables consumed by their child over the previous
24 h and previous 7 d. Scores on this scale can range from 0 to 28,
with a score of 14 indicating that the child is meeting Aus-
tralian Dietary Guidelines (33). An increase in the score could
arise from a range of changes to children’s fruit and vegetable
consumption patterns, eg, a 1-point increase could result from
eating an additional type of fruit or vegetable or eating fruit or
vegetable at an additional occasion in the previous 24 h.
Food expenditure
Participants were asked at baseline and at each follow-up to
estimate their average weekly household expenditure on food:
“On average, how much do you spend on food for your household
each week? This includes foods you buy from the supermarket as
well as any foods you buy and eat outside the home, for example,
takeaway, restaurant meals, lunches.” The psychometric prop-
erties of this item are unknown.
Process measures
Intervention ﬁdelity. The number of intervention calls com-
pleted by participants was automatically recorded by the CATI
system. During the monitoring of intervention calls, members of
the research team used a checklist to record whether the in-
terventionist discussed the key topics of each call (eg, serving
size recommendations) and the extent to which they delivered
TELEPHONE INTERVENTION FOR PRESCHOOL PARENTS
105
the script as per the protocol (always, mostly, sometimes, rarely,
or never).
Data collection. The CATI system automatically recorded the
date, time, and outcome of each data collection call attempt. The
proportion of times data collectors correctly identiﬁed the par-
ticipants’ group allocation at each time point was calculated.
Sample size calculation
The sample size allowed a detectable difference between the
intervention and control F&V scores of 1.27 (equivalent to
a change of 0.25 of an SD), with 80% power at the 0.05 sig-
niﬁcance level. Assuming an intraclass correlation coefﬁcient of
0.03 [unpublished data from Good for Kids. Good for Life,
Australia’s largest childhood obesity prevention program (34)],
it was calculated that recruiting 400 parents from 30 preschools
would achieve the desired sample of 300 participants (150 per
group) at the ﬁnal follow-up data collection at 18 mo.
Analysis
All statistical tests were performed by using SAS version 9.2
statistical software (SAS Institute). Descriptive statistics were
used to describe the study sample and process measures. Data
were analyzed by using an intention-to-treat approach, whereby
all participants were analyzed based on the group to which they
were allocated. For the analyses of F&V scores at follow-up,
a linear regression model within a generalized estimating
equation (GEE) framework was used to account for clustering by
preschool. The GEE accounts for clustering by weighting each
cluster inversely to its variance matrix, which is a function of the
within-cluster dependence (35). Children’s F&V score at base-
line was included as a covariate. Signiﬁcance testing was per-
formed with an a level of 0.05. Determination of intervention
efﬁcacy was based on an analysis using all available data and
speciﬁed a priori (22). This main analysis compared intervention
and control F&V scores at 2 mo and at 6 mo and assumed that
any missing data at follow-up were missing at random and in-
cluded all participants with complete baseline and 2-mo data
and baseline and 6-mo data, respectively. Little’s test was per-
formed to determine whether the missing data were missing
completely at random (36). A sensitivity analysis, speciﬁed
a priori, was undertaken to ensure that the ﬁndings of the main
analysis were robust against the missing data assumptions of the
GEE. This involved imputing missing data at the 2- or 6-mo
follow-up by using baseline observation carried forward. A per-
protocol analysis was also undertaken in which only intervention
participants who had received all 4 telephone calls were in-
cluded. When randomized trials are conducted, both sensitivity
and per-protocol analyses are recommended to aid interpretation
of the trial outcome (37). A subgroup analysis was also con-
ducted. The sample was divided into 2 subgroups: those whose
children were and those whose children were not meeting na-
tional dietary guidelines for fruit and vegetable consumption at
baseline (ie, a baseline F&V score 14 or ,14), and a GEE
model was ﬁtted that included a subgroup by experimental
group interaction. Changes in reported food expenditure at 2 and
6 mo were also assessed by using a GEE model adjusted for
baseline values and by using participants with no missing data at
2 and 6 mo, respectively, on this measure.
RESULTS
Participant characteristics
Children from ;2200 families attended the 30 eligible and
consenting preschools. In total, 418 parents returned a signed
consent form indicating a willingness to participate, 394 of
whom completed the baseline telephone survey and were in-
cluded in the study; 178 parents did not consent to participate
but returned a form with completed demographic details. The
preschool and participant ﬂow throughout the trial is shown in
Figure 1.
The characteristics of participants allocated to the intervention
and control groups were similar (Table 2). No signiﬁcant dif-
ferences in child age, sex, or daily intake of fruit or vegetables
were found between study participants and the children of 202
parents who either did not consent or initially consented but did
not complete the baseline survey. When compared with a ran-
dom sample of parents of 3–5-y-olds from the broader study
region, participants in the current study had higher levels of
education (47% compared with 36% with tertiary education) and
higher household incomes (41% compared with 20% US
$100,000) (38). The proportion of children consuming at least
one daily fruit serving in the current sample was similar to
a random sample of 2–4-y-old children in a broader region (96%
compared with 96%), but more children in the study sample
were consuming 2 servings of vegetables each day (65%
compared with 48%) (39).
In total, 86% and 84% of participants allocated to the in-
tervention and 96% and 91% of participants allocated to the
control group provided 2- and 6-mo follow-up data, respectively.
No signiﬁcant differences in demographic characteristics or in
baseline fruit and vegetable intakes were found between the
intervention group participants who completed and those who did
not complete the 2- or 6-mo follow-up surveys. Among the control
group, participants who did not complete the 6-mo follow-up
consumed more vegetable servings per day (mean 6 SD: 3.8 6
1.0 compared with 3.0 6 1.3; P = 0.013) at baseline and were
less likely to have a tertiary education qualiﬁcation (24%
compared with 52%; P = 0.025) than were control participants
who provided 6-mo data.
Children’s fruit and vegetable intakes
The analysis showed that the mean F&V scores were sig-
niﬁcantly higher in the intervention than in the control group at
both the 2-mo and 6-mo follow-ups (Table 3). Little’s test (v2 =
15.233, 2 df, P , 0.001) (36) was signiﬁcant, which suggests
that group allocation and the children’s F&V score at baseline
predicted missing data at follow-up. In the sensitivity analysis,
the intervention effect remained signiﬁcant when children’s
F&V scores at baseline were carried forward for missing data at
the 2-mo follow-up. Although the effect was nearly signiﬁcant
when such values were carried forward at the 6-mo follow-up, the
effect was not signiﬁcant (Table 3). The per-protocol analysis
showed that intervention participants who completed all 4 in-
tervention calls had signiﬁcantly higher F&V scores than did
control participants at 2 and 6 mo (Table 3). The subgroup
analysis comparing children who did and did not meet the dietary
guidelines at baseline found that the subgroup-by-experimental
group interaction term was not signiﬁcant.
106
WYSE ET AL
Food expenditure
At the 2-mo follow-up, the estimated weekly food expenditure
in intervention households was signiﬁcantly lower than that in
control households, adjusted for the baseline values, and no
signiﬁcant difference was observed at 6 mo (Table 4).
Process measures
Intervention ﬁdelity
Of the 208 participants allocated to the intervention, 87%
completed all 4 intervention calls. No signiﬁcant differences in
parent or child demographic characteristics or baseline fruit and
vegetable consumption were found between those who com-
pleted all intervention calls (n = 181) and those who did not (n =
27). Among those who did not, 16 participants did not complete
the ﬁrst call, 6 participants completed only the ﬁrst call, 4
completed the ﬁrst 2 calls, and 1 participant completed 3 calls.
The mean duration of all intervention calls was 29 min (34, 30,
26, and 28 min for calls 1–4, respectively). In total, 44 in-
tervention calls were monitored, representing 6% of all com-
pleted calls and an average of 9 calls per interventionist. Across
all monitored calls, interventionists covered 97% of key content
areas, and in .80% of calls they “rarely” deviated from the
script. In instances in which calls deviated from the script, in-
terventionists were provided with feedback immediately after
the call, and the issue was raised during biweekly supervision.
Data collection
On average, 74 d (2.4 mo) elapsed between baseline and the
scheduled 2-mo data collection call, and an average of 198 d (6.5
mo) elapsed between baseline and the scheduled 6-mo call; no
differences were observed between groups in the time elapsed
from baseline to either follow-up point. At the conclusion of the
2-mo and 6-mo follow-ups, data collectors correctly identiﬁed the
participants’ group allocation in 59% (P , 0.001) and 56% (P =
0.027) of cases, respectively, which represents slightly more
cases than would be expected by chance. In accordance with the
study protocol, 43 data collection calls (4%) were monitored
across the 3 time points, and, in every instance, interviewers
FIGURE 1. Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials diagram showing cluster (preschool) and participant (parent) ﬂow throughout the trial. #Although
418 parents consented, 24 parents were not randomly assigned because they were subsequently uncontactable (n = 5), did not meet inclusion criteria (n = 9), or
refused to complete the baseline survey when contacted (n = 10). *Two parents were excluded from the 2-mo analysis because they had been away from their
child for the previous 24 h and/or previous 7 d and were unable to answer questions about their child’s fruit and vegetable consumption. CDQ, Children’s
Dietary Questionnaire.
TELEPHONE INTERVENTION FOR PRESCHOOL PARENTS
107
delivered the questions as per the protocol “all” or “most of the
time.”
DISCUSSION
This is the ﬁrst randomized controlled trial of a telephone-
based primary prevention intervention to increase fruit and
vegetable consumption in preschool-aged children. An analysis
using all available data showed that children whose parents were
randomly allocated to receive 4 weekly scripted support calls had
higher fruit and vegetable scores at 2 and 6 mo after baseline than
did children whose parents were randomly allocated to receive
printed nutrition material. The sensitivity analysis, which adopted
a conservative imputation approach (baseline observation carried
forward), found a signiﬁcant intervention effect at 2 mo, which
was nearly signiﬁcant at 6 mo. The effect of the intervention
did not vary between children who were and those who were
not meeting fruit and vegetable dietary guidelines at baseline.
Furthermore, increases in child fruit and vegetable scores did
not coincide with increases in household expenditure on food,
which suggested that the intervention did not pose any ad-
ditional ﬁnancial burden on families.
The ﬁndings are promising given the limited effectiveness of
interventions attempting to increase young children’s fruit and
vegetable consumption. The only randomized controlled trial of
an intervention that explicitly targeted the home food environ-
ment to encourage fruit and vegetable consumption of preschool
children failed to increase fruit and vegetable consumption
overall but increased intake among a subsample of normal-weight
children (17). The intervention, which also consisted of 4 in-
tervention contacts, was delivered via home visits to a sample of
predominantly disadvantaged families (20–25% university edu-
cated, 50–60% with an annual household income ,$35,000)
(17). The contrasting ﬁndings may reﬂect the difﬁculties expe-
rienced by socioeconomically disadvantaged parents, relative to
the current sample, of increasing children’s fruit and vegetable
intake. Whereas the effect of this telephone-based intervention
on children from disadvantaged families is not known, more in-
tensive telephone-based support, which is considerate of the
distinct challenges of disadvantaged families [including cost,
work schedules, lack of time, and lack of skills and conﬁdence
(40–42)], may maximize the potential effectiveness and accept-
ability of a telephone-based approach to such parents. Nonethe-
less, the results are consistent with the pilot study (20) and with
systematic reviews ﬁnding strong evidence of the efﬁcacy of adult
dietary interventions delivered by telephone (19, 43).
Given the positive trial ﬁndings, the research has many im-
portant public health implications. First, the intervention was
relatively brief, scripted, and delivered by nonspecialist staff.
Such attributes suggest that the intervention could easily be
integrated into existing telephone support services (44) and may
be relatively inexpensive compared with services using specialist
TABLE 2
Characteristics of the 394 participants who completed baseline by group1
Parent and child
demographic characteristics
Control
(n = 186)
Intervention
(n = 208)
Parents
Age (y)
35.7 6 5.02
35.2 6 5.6
Female sex (%)
96.8
95.2
Household income $100,000 (%)
40.2
42.4
University education (%)
49.5
45.2
Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander (%)
3.2
1.0
No. of children aged ,16 y in household
2.3 6 0.7
2.3 6 0.8
No. of daily servings of fruit
1.8 6 1.0
1.8 6 1.1
No. of daily servings of vegetables
3.1 6 1.3
3.3 6 1.3
Children
Age (y)
4.3 6 0.6
4.3 6 0.6
Female sex (%)
45.7
51.0
Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander (%)
4.8
1.0
No. of daily servings of fruit3
2.2 6 1.0
2.3 6 1.0
No. of daily servings of vegetables3
2.0 6 1.2
2.1 6 1.1
1 Between-group differences at baseline were tested by using chi-square
tests for categorical data and t tests for continuous data; there were no
signiﬁcant differences between the intervention and control groups (P ,
0.05).
2 Mean 6 SD (all such values).
3 Information taken from a consent form.
TABLE 3
Fruit and Vegetable Subscale scores in the intervention and control groups at baseline, 2 mo, and 6 mo1
Time point
Mean 6 SEM
Regression coefﬁcient
(95% CI)2
P value
Control
Intervention
Main analysis
Baseline (n = 394)
14.5 6 0.4
15.0 6 0.3
—
2 mo (n = 357)
15.4 6 0.3
17.0 6 0.3
1.28 (0.54, 2.03)
,0.001
6 mo (n = 343)
15.9 6 0.3
17.0 6 0.3
0.80 (0.12, 1.49)
0.021
Sensitivity analysis
Baseline (n = 394)
14.5 6 0.4
15.0 6 0.3
—
2 mo (n = 394)
15.3 6 0.3
16.6 6 0.3
0.98 (0.26, 1.70)
0.008
6 mo (n = 394)
15.8 6 0.2
16.7 6 0.2
0.59 (20.05, 1.22)
0.069
Per-protocol analysis
Baseline (n = 367)
14.5 6 0.4
15.2 6 0.4
—
2 mo (n = 351)
15.4 6 0.3
17.1 6 0.3
1.34 (0.59, 2.10)
,0.001
6 mo (n = 334)
15.9 6 0.3
17.1 6 0.3
0.87 (0.17, 1.56)
0.014
1 Data were analyzed by using a generalized estimating equation framework, adjusted for children’s scores
at baseline and clustering within preschools (P , 0.05).
2 Adjusted for baseline scores.
108
WYSE ET AL
health professionals for the provision of child nutrition support.
Second, the intervention had high retention rates (87%) and was
previously found to be acceptable to parents (20), indicating
broad appeal of this form of support. Finally, the intervention was
delivered by using a modality that affords almost population-wide
access in the developed world (45). As such, the intervention has
the potential to overcome barriers to parent use of traditional
support services, such as conﬂicting or inﬂexible schedules, time
constraints, and transport difﬁculties (41, 46), particularly those
faced by rural and socioeconomically disadvantaged households
(41), and should be tested with a less-advantaged sample.
Collectively, such research suggests that the telephone-based
intervention may represent an appealing policy option for gov-
ernments or other health agencies to improve public health nu-
trition and reduce future chronic disease.
The strengths of this study included the experimental design,
the standardization of intervention delivery (via scripted dialogue
appearing on computer screens), and consideration of unintended
cost effects of the intervention. There were, however, many study
limitations that warrant consideration. The sample included
participants who, on average, were more educated and had a
higher household income than did a random sample of parents
within the study region, and, as such, further investigation ex-
amining intervention effectiveness in more disadvantaged pop-
ulations is recommended. Furthermore, the generalizability of
the ﬁndings may be limited by the high proportion of children
consuming the recommended number of daily vegetable serv-
ings at baseline, compared with the broader study area. The
subgroup analysis, however, suggested that no signiﬁcant dif-
ference in intervention efﬁcacy was observed between children
who consumed high or low amounts of fruit and vegetables at
baseline. As is common in trials of behavioral interventions (47),
parent participants in this trial were unblinded, and the primary
outcome measure was subjectively assessed by parent report,
which increased the risk of a biased assessment of intervention
effect (48). Furthermore, the primary outcome was assessed by
using a food-frequency questionnaire. Whereas this tool repre-
sented the only measure of fruit and vegetable consumption
available to the research team that had been validated on a sample
of Australian preschool children (33, 49), a more comprehensive
method of dietary assessment—such as food records or 24-h
dietary recalls—may have yielded more accurate assessments of
intake (50) and allowed for a more meaningful comparison with
other studies. Finally, by the end of each survey, outcome as-
sessors were 6–9% more likely than chance to correctly identify
the group to which participants were allocated, which potentially
increased the risk of detection bias (48).
Many opportunities for further research exist. Although the
analysis using all available data showed a signiﬁcant intervention
effect at both 2 and 6 mo of follow-up, the sensitivity analysis fell
short of signiﬁcance at 6 mo. Research is therefore required to
conﬁrm these ﬁndings. Whereas the presence of a short-term
intervention effect is encouraging, further investigation to de-
termine whether the effect is maintained in the longer term is also
warranted. Research into the optimal schedule of telephone
contacts could increase the efﬁciency of the intervention by
determining the maximum effect that can be obtained for a given
level of resources. Investigating the characteristics of the home
food environment that mediated the relation between the in-
tervention and dietary behavior (eg, parent knowledge, self-
efﬁcacy, and fruit and vegetable availability) would also allow
a greater understanding of the causal pathways and further in-
tervention reﬁnement and may result in greater efﬁciencies in
intervention delivery (51). Notwithstanding the study limitations,
and the value of further research in this area, the study represents
an important contribution to the scientiﬁc literature regarding
public health interventions addressing childhood fruit and veg-
etable consumption.
We thank Patrick McElduff for his statistical advice and Jenna Hollis for
the crucial role she played in the trial’s administration. We acknowledge the
indispensable contribution of the Hunter New England Population Health
CATI interviewers in delivering the intervention and collecting the data
and sincerely thank the preschool supervisors and the parents for their gen-
erous participation.
The authors’ responsibilities were as follows—LW: conceived of the pro-
ject idea; LW, RW, EC, JW, KJC, LB, JB, TRH, and AF: designed the re-
search;
KJC
and
LB:
provided
expert
advice
on
the
design
and
implementation of the intervention; RW, AF, LW, and LB: conducted the re-
search; RW and LW: analyzed the data and performed the statistical analysis;
and RW: led the development of the manuscript and had primary responsi-
bility for the ﬁnal content. All authors contributed to the drafts and read
and approved the ﬁnal manuscript. None of the authors reported a conﬂict
of interest.
REFERENCES
1. World Cancer Research Fund/American Institute for Cancer Research.
Food, nutrition, physical activity, and the prevention of cancer: a global
perspective. Washington, DC: AICR, 2007.
2. Dauchet L, Amouyel P, Hercberg S, Dallongeville J. Fruit and vege-
table consumption and risk of coronary heart disease: a meta-analysis
of cohort studies. J Nutr 2006;136:2588–93.
3. He FJ, Nowson CA, MacGregor GA. Fruit and vegetable consumption
and stroke: meta-analysis of cohort studies. Lancet 2006;367:320–6.
4. Lock K, Pomerleau J, Causer L, Altmann DR, McKee M. The global
burden of disease attributable to low consumption of fruit and vege-
tables: implications for the global strategy on diet. Bull World Health
Organ 2005;83:100–8.
TABLE 4
Estimated weekly food expenditure in the intervention and control groups at baseline, 2 mo, and 6 mo1
Mean 6 SEM
Estimated weekly food expenditure
Control
Intervention
Regression coefﬁcient (95% CI)2
P value
US$
US$
US$
Baseline (n = 392)
234 6 3
241 6 7
—
—
2 mo (n = 358)
252 6 5
235 6 5
220 (232, 28)
,0.001
6 mo (n = 342)
246 6 5
245 6 7
25 (217, 7)
0.426
1 Data were analyzed by using a generalized estimating equation framework, adjusted for weekly food expenditure at
baseline and clustering within preschools (P , 0.05).
2 Adjusted for baseline expenditure.
TELEPHONE INTERVENTION FOR PRESCHOOL PARENTS
109
5. Mikkila¨ V, Rasanen L, Raitakari OT, Pietinen P, Viikari J. Longitudinal
changes in diet from childhood into adulthood with respect to risk of
cardiovascular diseases: the Cardiovascular Risk in Young Finns Study.
Eur J Clin Nutr 2004;58:1038–45.
6. Ness AR, Maynard M, Frankel S, Smith GD, Frobisher C, Leary SD,
Emmett PM, Gunnell D. Diet in childhood and adult cardiovascular
and all cause mortality: the Boyd Orr cohort. Heart 2005;91:894–8.
7. Maynard M, Gunnell D, Emmett P, Frankel S, Davey Smith G. Fruit,
vegetables, and antioxidants in childhood and risk of adult cancer: the
Boyd Orr cohort. J Epidemiol Community Health 2003;57:218–25.
8. Birch LL. Development of food preferences. Annu Rev Nutr 1999;19:
41–62.
9. Hector D, Shrewsbury V. Building solutions for preventing childhood
obesity. Module 2: Interventions to increase consumption of fruit and veg-
etables. Sydney, Australia: NSW Centre for Overweight and Obesity, 2008.
10. Campbell KJ, Hesketh KD. Strategies which aim to positively impact
on weight, physical activity, diet and sedentary behaviours in children
from zero to ﬁve years. A systematic review of the literature. Obes Rev
2007;8:327–38.
11. Bayer O, von Kries R, Strauss A, Mitschek C, Toschke AM, Hose A,
Koletzko BV. Short- and mid-term effects of a setting based prevention
program to reduce obesity risk factors in children: a cluster-randomized
trial. Clin Nutr 2009;28:122–8.
12. Witt KE, Dunn C. Increasing fruit and vegetable consumption among
preschoolers: evaluation of Color Me Healthy. J Nutr Educ Behav
2012;44:107–13.
13. Vereecken C, Huybrechts I, van Houte H, Martens V, Wittebroodt I,
Maes L. Results from a dietary intervention study in preschools
“Beastly Healthy at School.” Int J Public Health 2009;54:142–9.
14. Hardy LL, King L, Kelly B, Farrell L, Howlett S. Munch and Move:
evaluation of a preschool healthy eating and movement skill program.
Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act 2010;7:80.
15. Pearson N, Biddle SJ, Gorely T. Family correlates of fruit and vege-
table consumption in children and adolescents: a systematic review.
Public Health Nutr 2009;12:267–83.
16. Rasmussen M, Krolner R, Klepp KI, Lytle L, Brug J, Bere E, Due P.
Determinants of fruit and vegetable consumption among children and
adolescents: a review of the literature. Part I: Quantitative studies. Int J
Behav Nutr Phys Act 2006;3:22.
17. Haire-Joshu D, Elliott MB, Caito NM, Hessler K, Nanney MS, Hale N,
Boehmer TK, Kreuter M, Brownson RC. High 5 for Kids: the impact of
a home visiting program on fruit and vegetable intake of parents and
their preschool children. Prev Med 2008;47:77–82.
18. Vanwormer JJ, Boucher JL, Pronk NP. Telephone-based counseling
improves dietary fat, fruit, and vegetable consumption: a best-evidence
synthesis. J Am Diet Assoc 2006;106:1434–44.
19. Eakin EG, Lawler SP, Vandelanotte C, Owen N. Telephone inter-
ventions for physical activity and dietary behavior change: a systematic
review. Am J Prev Med 2007;32:419–34.
20. Wyse R, Wolfenden L, Campbell E, Campbell K, Brennan L, Fletcher A,
Bowman J, Heard T, Wiggers J. A pilot study of a telephone-based parental
intervention to increase fruit and vegetable consumption in 3-5-year-old
children. Public Health Nutr (Epub ahead of print 23 June 2011).
21. Drewnowski A, Darmon N, Briend A. Replacing fats and sweets with
vegetables and fruits—a question of cost. Am J Public Health 2004;94:
1555–9.
22. Wyse RJ, Wolfenden L, Campbell E, Brennan L, Campbell KJ,
Fletcher A, Bowman J, Heard TR, Wiggers J. A cluster randomised
trial of a telephone-based intervention for parents to increase fruit and
vegetable consumption in their 3- to 5-year-old children: study pro-
tocol. BMC Public Health 2010;10:216.
23. Wolfenden L, Kypri K, Freund M, Hodder R. Obtaining active parental
consent for school-based research: a guide for researchers. Aust N Z J
Public Health 2009;33:270–5.
24. Australian Bureau of Statistics. Census of population and housing:
Socio-Economic Indexes for Areas (SEIFA) (2033.0.55.001). Canberra,
Australia: ABS, 2006.
25. Green BB, McAfee T, Hindmarsh M, Madsen L, Caplow M, Buist D.
Effectiveness of telephone support in increasing physical activity levels
in primary care patients. Am J Prev Med 2002;22:177–83.
26. Elley CR, Kerse N, Arroll B, Robinson E. Effectiveness of counselling
patients on physical activity in general practice: cluster randomised
controlled trial. BMJ 2003;326:793.
27. Satter E. Feeding dynamics: helping children to eat well. J Pediatr
Health Care 1995;9:178–84.
28. Robinson T. Applying the socio-ecological model to improving fruit
and vegetable intake among low-income African Americans. J Com-
munity Health 2008;33:395–406.
29. Golan M, Weizman A. Familial approach to the treatment of childhood
obesity: conceptual mode. J Nutr Educ 2001;33:102–7.
30. Abraham C, Michie S. A taxonomy of behavior change techniques
used in interventions. Health Psychol 2008;27:379–87.
31. Choi BC. Computer assisted telephone interviewing (CATI) for health
surveys in public health surveillance: methodological issues and chal-
lenges ahead. Chronic Dis Can 2004;25:21–7.
32. Kellet E, Smith A, Schmerlaib Y. The Australian guide to healthy
eating: background information for consumers. Canberra, Australia: The
Australian Government Department of Health and Ageing, 1998.
33. Magarey A, Golley R, Spurrier N, Goodwin E, Ong F. Reliability and
validity of the Children’s Dietary Questionnaire; a new tool to measure
children’s dietary patterns. Int J Pediatr Obes 2009;4:257–65.
34. Good for kids. Good for life. 2010. Available from: http://www.
goodforkids.nsw.gov.au (cited 9 November 2011).
35. Liang KY, Zeger SL. Regression analysis for correlated data. Annu Rev
Public Health 1993;14:43–68.
36. Little RJA. A test of missing completely at random for multivariate
data with missing values. J Am Stat Assoc 1988;83:1198–12.
37. Porta N, Bonet C, Cobo E. Discordance between reported intention-to-
treat and per protocol analyses. J Clin Epidemiol 2007;60:663–9.
38. Wolfenden L, Hardy LL, Milat A, Bell C, Sutherland R, Wiggers J.
Prevalence and socio-demographic associations of overweight and
obesity among children attending childcare services in rural and re-
gional New South Wales Australia. Nutr Diet 2011;68:15–20.
39. Centre for Epidemiology and Research. New South Wales Population
Health Survey 2007-2008 (HOIST). New South Wales, Australia: NSW
Department of Health, 2008.
40. Omar MA, Coleman G, Hoerr S. Healthy eating for rural low-income
toddlers: caregivers’ perceptions. J Community Health Nurs 2001;18:
93–106.
41. Katz I, La Placa V, Hunter S. Barriers to inclusion and successful
engagement of parents in mainstream services. York, United Kingdom:
Joseph Rowntree Foundation, 2007.
42. Winkler E, Turrell G. Conﬁdence to cook vegetables and the buy-
ing habits of Australian households. J Am Diet Assoc 2009;109:
1759–68.
43. Goode AD, Reeves MM, Eakin EG. Telephone-delivered interventions
for physical activity and dietary behavior change: an updated sys-
tematic review. Am J Prev Med 2012;42:81–8.
44. O’Hara BJ, Bauman AE, King EL, Phongsavan P. Process evaluation of
the advertising campaign for the NSW Get Healthy Information and
Coaching Servce. Health Promot J Austr 2011;22:68–71.
45. International Telecommunications Union. Global ICT developments.
2008. Available from: http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/statistics/ict/index.
html (cited 9 November 2011).
46. Lamb-Parker F, Piotrkowski CS, Baker AJL, Kessler-Sklar S, Clark
B, Peay L. Understanding barriers to parent involvement in Head
Start: a research-community partnership. Early Child Res Q 2001;16:
35–51.
47. Boutron I, Tubach F, Giraudeau B, Ravaud P. Blinding was judged
more difﬁcult to achieve and maintain in nonpharmacologic than
pharmacologic trials. J Clin Epidemiol 2004;57:543–50.
48. The Cochrane Collaboration. Cochrane handbook for systematic
reviews of interventions (version 5.1.0, March 2011). Available from:
http://www.cochrane.org/training/cochrane-handbook (cited 2 October
2011).
49. Australasian Child and Adolescent Obesity Research Network
(ACAORN). ACAORN repository of tools to measure dietary intake in
children and adolescents—September 2009. Available from: www.acaorn.
org.au/streams/nutrition/Pub_Repository_diet_assess_tools_Sept2009.
pdf (cited 1 February 2012).
50. McPherson RS, Hoelscher DM, Alexander M, Scanlon KS, Serdula
MK. Dietary assessment methods among school-aged children: validity
and reliability. Prev Med 2000;31:S11–33.
51. Cerin E, Mackinnon DP. A commentary on current practice in medi-
ating variable analyses in behavioural nutrition and physical activity.
Public Health Nutr 2009;12:1182–8.
110
WYSE ET AL
